The Galactic Empire Was Falling.
It was a colossal Empire, stretching across millions of worlds from arm-end to arm-end of the
mighty multi-spiral that was the Milky Way. Its fall was colossal, too – and a long one, for it had
a long way to go.
It had been falling for centuries before one man became really aware of that fall. That man was
Hari Seldon, the man who represented the one spark of creative effort left among the gathering
decay. He developed and brought to its highest pitch the science of psychohistory.
Psychohistory dealt not with man, but with man-masses. It was the science of mobs; mobs in
their billions. It could forecast reactions to stimuli with something of the accuracy that a lesser
science could bring to the forecast of a rebound of a billiard ball. The reaction of one man could
be forecast by no known mathematics; the reaction of a billion is something else again.
Hari Seldon plotted the social and economic trends of the time, sighted along the curves and
foresaw the continuing and accelerating fall of civilization and the gap of thirty thousand years
that must elapse before a struggling new Empire could emerge from the ruins.
It was too late to stop that fall, but not too late to narrow the gap of barbarism. Seldon
established two Foundations at "opposite ends of the Galaxy" and their location was so
designed that in one short millennium events would knit and mesh so as to force out of them a
stronger, more permanent, more benevolent Second Empire.
Foundation (Gnome Press, 1951) has told the story of one of those Foundations during the first
two centuries of life.
It began as a settlement of physical scientists on Terminus, a planet at the extreme end of one
of the spiral arms of the Galaxy. Separated from the turmoil of the Empire, they worked as
compilers of a universal compendium of knowledge, the Encyclopedia Galactica, unaware of
the deeper role planned for them by the already-dead Seldon,
As the Empire rotted, the outer regions fell into the hands of independent "kings." The
Foundation was threatened by them. However, by playing one petty ruler against another,
under the leadership of their first mayor, Salvor Hardin, they maintained a precarious
independence. As sole possessors, of nuclear power among worlds which were losing their
sciences and falling back on coal and oil, they even established an ascendancy. The
Foundation became the "religious" center of the neighboring kingdoms.
Slowly, the Foundation developed a trading economy as the Encyclopedia receded into the
background. Their Traders, dealing in nuclear gadgets which not even the Empire in its heyday
could have duplicated for compactness, penetrated hundreds of light-years through the
Periphery.
Under Hober Mallow, the first of the Foundation's Merchant Princes, they developed the
techniques of economic warfare to the point of defeating the Republic of Korell, even though
that world was receiving support from one of the outer provinces of what was left of the Empire.
At the end of two hundred years, the Foundation was the most powerful state in the Galaxy,
except for the remains of the Empire, which, concentrated in the inner third of the Milky Way,
still controlled three quarters of the population and wealth of the Universe.
It seemed inevitable that the next danger the Foundation would have to face was the final lash
of the dying Empire.
The way must he cleared for the battle of Foundation and Empire.
PART I
THE GENERAL
1. SEARCH FOR MAGICIANS
BEL RIOSE .... In his relatively short career, Riose earned the title of "The Last of the Imperials"
and earned it well. A study of his campaigns reveals him to be the equal of Peurifoy in strategic
ability and his superior perhaps in his ability to handle men. That he was born in the days of the
decline of Empire made it all but impossible for him to equal Peurifoy's record as a conqueror.
Yet he had his chance when, the first of the Empire's generals to do so, he faced the
Foundation squarely....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA*
*All quotations from the Encyclopedia Galactica here reproduced are taken from the 116th
Edition published in 1020 F.E. by the Encyclopedia Galactica Publishing Co., Terminus, with
permission of the publishers.
Bel Riose traveled without escort, which is not what court etiquette prescribes for the head of a
fleet stationed in a yet-sullen stellar system on the Marches of the Galactic Empire.
But Bel Riose was young and energetic – energetic enough to be sent as near the end of the
universe as possible by an unemotional and calculating court – and curious besides. Strange
and improbable tales fancifully-repeated by hundreds and murkily-known to thousands intrigued
the last faculty; the possibility of a military venture engaged the other two. The combination was
overpowering.
He was out of the dowdy ground-car he had appropriated and at the door of the fading mansion
that was his destination. He waited. The photonic eye that spanned the doorway was alive, but
when the door opened it was by hand.
Bel Riose smiled at the old man. "I am Riose–"
"I recognize you." The old man remained stiffly and unsurprised in his place. "Your business?"
Riose withdrew a step in a gesture of submission. "One of peace. If you are Ducem Barr, I ask
the favor of conversation."
Ducem Barr stepped aside and in the interior of the house the walls glowed into life, The
general entered into daylight.
He touched the wall of the study, then stared at his fingertips. "You have this on Siwenna?"
Barr smiled thinly. "Not elsewhere, I believe. I keep this in repair myself as well as I can. I must
apologize for your wait at the door. The automatic device registers the presence of a visitor but
will no longer open the door."
"Your repairs fall short?" The general's voice was faintly mocking.
"Parts are no longer available. If you will sit, sir. You drink tea?"
"On Siwenna? My good sir, it is socially impossible not to drink it here."
The old patrician retreated noiselessly with a slow bow that was part of the ceremonious legacy
left by the aristocracy of the last century's better days.
Riose looked after his host's departing figure, and his studied urbanity grew a bit uncertain at
the edges. His education had been purely military; his experience likewise. He had, as the
cliché‚ has it, faced death many times; but always death of a very familiar and tangible nature,
Consequently, there is no inconsistency in the fact that the idolized lion of the Twentieth Fleet
felt chilled in the suddenly musty atmosphere of an ancient room.
The general recognized the small black-ivroid boxes that lined the shelves to be books. Their
titles were unfamiliar. He guessed that the large structure at one end of the room was the
receiver that transmuted the books into sight-and-sound on demand. He had never seen one in
operation; but he had heard of them.
Once he had been told that long before, during the golden ages when the Empire had been
co-extensive with the entire Galaxy, nine houses out of every ten had such receivers – and
such rows of books.
But there were borders to watch now; books were for old men. And half the stories told about
the old days were mythical anyway. More than half.
The tea arrived, and Riose seated himself. Ducem Barr lifted his cup. "To your honor."
"Thank you. To yours."
Ducem Barr said deliberately, "You are said to be young. Thirty-five?"
"Near enough. Thirty-four."
"In that case," said Barr, with soft emphasis, "I could not begin better than by informing you
regretfully that I am not in the possession of love charms, potions, or philtres. Nor am I in the
least capable of influencing the favors of any young lady as may appeal to you."
"I have no need of artificial aids in that respect, sir." The complacency undeniably present in the
general's voice was stirred with amusement. "Do you receive many requests for such
commodities?"
"Enough. Unfortunately, an uninformed public tends to confuse scholarship with magicianry,
and love life seems to be that factor which requires the largest quantity of magical tinkering."
"And so would seem most natural. But I differ. I connect scholarship with nothing but the means
of answering difficult questions."
The Siwennian considered somberly, "You may be as wrong as they!"
"That may turn out or not." The young general set down his cup in its flaring sheath and it
refilled. He dropped the offered flavor-capsule into it with a small splash. "Tell me then,
patrician, who are the magicians? The real ones."
Barr seemed startled at a title long-unused. He said, "There are no magicians."
"But people speak of them. Siwenna crawls with the tales of them. There are cults being built
about them. There is some strange connection between it and those groups among your
countrymen who dream and drivel of ancient days and what they call liberty and autonomy.
Eventually the matter might become a danger to the State."
The old man shook his head. "Why ask me? Do you smell rebellion, with myself at the head?"
Riose shrugged, "Never. Never. Oh, it is not a thought completely ridiculous. Your father was
an exile in his day; you yourself a patriot and a chauvinist in yours. It is indelicate in me as a
guest to mention it, but my business here requires it. And yet a conspiracy now? I doubt it.
Siwenna has had the spirit beat out of it these three generations."
The old man replied with difficulty, "I shall be as indelicate a host as you a guest. I shall remind
you that once a viceroy thought as you did of the spiritless Siwennians. By the orders of that
viceroy my father became a fugitive pauper, my brothers martyrs, and my sister a suicide. Yet
that viceroy died a death sufficiently horrible at the hands of these same slavish Siwennians."
"Ah, yes, and there you touch nearly on something I could wish to say. For three years the
mysterious death of that viceroy has been no mystery to me. There was a young soldier of his
personal guard whose actions were of interest. You were that soldier, but there is no need of
details, I think."
Barr was quiet. "None. What do you propose?"
"That you answer my questions."
"Not under threats. I am old enough for life not to mean particularly overmuch."
"My good sir, these are hard times," said Riose, with meaning, "and you have children and
friends. You have a country for which you have mouthed phrases of love and folly in the past.
Come, if I should decide to use force, my aim would not be so poor as to strike you."
Barr said coldly, "What do you want?"
Riose held the empty cup as he spoke. "Patrician, listen to me. These are days when the most
successful soldiers are those whose function is to lead the dress parades that wind through the
imperial palace grounds on feast days and to escort the sparkling pleasure ships that carry His
Imperial Splendor to the summer planets. I ... I am a failure. I am a failure at thirty-four, and I
shall stay a failure. Because, you see, I like to fight.
"That's why they sent me here. I'm too troublesome at court. I don't fit in with the etiquette. I
offend the dandies and the lord admirals, but I'm too good a leader of ships and men to be
disposed of shortly be being marooned in space. So Siwenna is the substitute. It's a frontier
world; a rebellious and a barren province. It is far away, far enough away to satisfy all.
"And so I moulder. There are no rebellions to stamp down, and the border viceroys do not
revolt lately, at least, not since His Imperial Majesty's late father of glorious memory made an
example of Mountel of Paramay."
"A strong Emperor," muttered Barr.
"Yes, and we need more of them. He is my master; remember that. These are his interests I
guard."
Barr shrugged unconcernedly. "How does all this relate to the subject?"
"I'll show you in two words. The magicians I've mentioned come from beyond-out there beyond
the frontier guards, where the stars are scattered thinly–"
"'Where the stars are scattered thinly,"' quoted Barr, "'And the cold of space seeps in."'
"Is that poetry?" Riose frowned. Verse seemed frivolous at the moment. "In any case, they're
from the Periphery – from the only quarter where I am free to fight for the glory of the Emperor."
"And thus serve His Imperial Majesty's interests and satisfy your own love of a good fight."
"Exactly. But I must know what I fight; and there you can help."
"How do you know?"
Riose nibbled casually at a cakelet. "Because for three years I have traced every rumor, every
myth, every breath concerning the magicians – and of all the library of information I have
gathered, only two isolated facts are unanimously agreed upon, and are hence certainly true.
The first is that the magicians come from the edge of the Galaxy opposite Siwenna; the second
is that your father once met a magician, alive and actual, and spoke with him."
The aged Siwennian stared unblinkingly, and Riose continued, "You had better tell me what
you know–"
Barr said thoughtfully, "It would be interesting to tell you certain things. It would be a
psychohistoric experiment of my own."
"What kind of experiment?"
"Psychohistoric." The old man had an unpleasant edge to his smile. Then, crisply, "You'd better
have more tea. I'm going to make a bit of a speech."
He leaned far back into the soft cushions of his chair. The wall-lights had softened to a
pink-ivory glow, which mellowed even the soldier's hard profile.
Ducem Barr began, "My own knowledge is the result of two accidents; the accidents of being
born the son of my father, and of being born the native of my country. It begins over forty years
ago, shortly after the great Massacre, when my father was a fugitive in the forests of the South,
while I was a gunner in the viceroy's personal fleet. This same viceroy, by the way, who had
ordered the Massacre, and who died such a cruel death thereafter."
Barr smiled grimly, and continued, "My father was a Patrician of the Empire and a Senator of
Siwenna. His name was Onum Barr."
Riose interrupted impatiently, "I know the circumstances of his exile very well. You needn't
elaborate upon it."
The Siwennian ignored him and proceeded without deflection. "During his exile a wanderer
came upon him; a merchant from the edge of the Galaxy; a young man who spoke a strange
accent, knew nothing of recent Imperial history, and who was protected by an individual
force-shield."
"An individual force-shield?" Riose glared. "You speak extravagance. What generator could be
powerful enough to condense a shield to the size of a single man? By the Great Galaxy, did he
carry five thousand myria-tons of nuclear power-source about with him on a little wheeled
gocart?"
Barr said quietly, "This is the magician of whom you hear whispers, stories and myths. The
name 'magician' is not lightly earned. He carried no generator large enough to be seen, but not
the heaviest weapon you can carry in your hand would have as much as creased the shield he
bore."
"Is this all the story there is? Are the magicians born of maunderings of an old man broken by
suffering and exile?"
"The story of the magicians antedated even my father, sir. And the proof is more concrete. After
leaving my father, this merchant that men call a magician visited a Tech-man at the city to
which my father had guided him, and there he left a shield-generator of the type he wore. That
generator was retrieved by my father after his return from exile upon the execution of the
bloody viceroy. It took a long time to find–
"The generator hangs on the wall behind you, sir. It does not work. It never worked but for the
first two days; but if you'll look at it, you will see that no one in the Empire ever designed it."
Bel Riose reached for the belt of linked metal that clung to the curved wall. It came away with a
little sucking noise as the tiny adhesion-field broke at the touch of his hand. The ellipsoid at the
apex of the belt held his attention. It was the size of a walnut.
"This–" he said.
"Was the generator," nodded Barr. "But it was the generator. The secret of its workings are
beyond discovery now. Sub-electronic investigations have shown it to be fused into a single
lump of metal and not all the most careful study of the diffraction patterns have sufficed to
distinguish the discrete parts that had existed before fusion."
"Then your 'proof' still lingers on the frothy border of words backed by no concrete evidence."
Barr shrugged. "You have demanded my knowledge of me and threatened its extortion by
force. If you choose to meet it with skepticism, what is that to me? Do you want me to stop?"
"Go on!" said the general, harshly.
"I continued my father's researches after he died, and then the second accident I mentioned
came to help me, for Siwenna was well known to Hari Seldon."
"And who is Hari Seldon?"
"Hari Seldon was a scientist of the reign of the Emperor, Daluben IV. He was a psychohistorian;
the last and greatest of them all. He once visited Siwenna, when Siwenna was a great
commercial center, rich in the arts and sciences."
"Hmph," muttered Riose, sourly, "where is the stagnant planet that does not claim to have been
a land of overflowing wealth in older days?"
"The days I speak of are the days of two centuries ago, when the Emperor yet ruled to the
uttermost star; when Siwenna was a world of the interior and not a semi-barbarian border
province. In those days, Hari Seldon foresaw the decline of Imperial power and the eventual
barbarization of the entire Galaxy."
Riose laughed suddenly. "He foresaw that? Then he foresaw wrong, my good scientist. I
suppose you call yourself that. Why, the Empire is more powerful now than it has been in a
millennium. Your old eyes are blinded by the cold bleakness of the border. Come to the inner
worlds some day; come to the warmth and the wealth of the center."
The old man shook his head somberly. "Circulation ceases first at the outer edges. It will take a
while yet for the decay to reach the heart. That is, the apparent, obvious-to-all decay, as distinct
from the inner decay that is an old story of some fifteen centuries."
"And so this Hari Seldon foresaw a Galaxy of uniform barbarism," said Riose, good-humoredly.
"And what then, eh?"
"So he established two foundations at the extreme opposing ends of the Galaxy – Foundations
of the best, and the youngest, and the strongest, there to breed, grow, and develop. The worlds
on which they were placed were chosen carefully; as were the times and the surroundings. All
was arranged in such a way that the future as foreseen by the unalterable mathematics of
psychohistory would involve their early isolation from the main body of Imperial civilization and
their gradual growth into the germs of the Second Galactic Empire – cutting an inevitable
barbarian interregnum from thirty thousand years to scarcely a single thousand."
"And where did you find out all this? You seem to know it in detail."
"I don't and never did," said the patrician with composure. "It is the painful result of the piecing
together of certain evidence discovered by my father and a little more found by myself. The
basis is flimsy and the superstructure has been romanticized into existence to fill the huge
gaps. But I am convinced that it is essentially true."
"You are easily convinced."
"Am I? It has taken forty years of research."
"Hmph. Forty years! I could settle the question in forty days. In fact, I believe I ought to. It would
be – different."
"And how would you do that?"
"In the obvious way. I could become an explorer. I could find this Foundation you speak of and
observe with my eyes. You say there are two?"
"The records speak of two. Supporting evidence has been found only for one, which is
understandable, for the other is at the extreme end of the long axis of the Galaxy."
"Well, we'll visit the near one." The general was on his feet, adjusting his belt.
"You know where to go?" asked Barr.
"In a way. In the records of the last viceroy but one, he whom you murdered so effectively,
there are suspicious tales of outer barbarians. In fact, one of his daughters was given in
marriage to a barbarian prince. I'll find my way."
He held out a hand. "I thank you for your hospitality."
Ducem Barr touched the hand with his fingers and bowed formally. "Your visit was a great
honor."
"As for the information you gave me," continued Bel Riose, "I'll know how to thank you for that
when I return."
Ducem Barr followed his guest submissively to the outer door and said quietly to the
disappearing ground-car, "And if you return."
2. THE MAGICIANS
FOUNDATION ... With forty years of expansion behind them, the Foundation faced the menace
of Riose. The epic days of Hardin and Mallow had gone and with them were gone a certain
hard daring and resolution....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
There were four men in the room, and the room was set apart where none could approach. The
four men looked at each other quickly, then lengthily at the table that separated them. There
were four bottles on the table and as many full glasses, but no one had touched them.
And then the man nearest the door stretched out an arm and drummed a slow, padding rhythm
on the table.
He said, "Are you going to sit and wonder forever? Does it matter who speaks first?"
"Speak you first, then," said the big man directly opposite. "You're the one who should be the
most worried."
Sennett Forell chuckled with noiseless nonhumor. "Because you think I'm the richest. Well – Or
is it that you expect me to continue as I have started. I don't suppose you forget that it was my
own Trade Fleet that captured this scout ship of theirs."
"You had the largest fleet," said a third, "and the best pilots; which is another way of saying you
are the richest. It was a fearful risk; and would have been greater for one of us."
Sennett Forell chuckled again. "There is a certain facility in risk-taking that I inherit from my
father. After all, the essential point in running a risk is that the returns justify it. As to which,
witness the fact that the enemy ship was isolated and captured without loss to ourselves or
warning to the others."
That Forell was a distant collateral relative of the late great Hober Mallow was recognized
openly throughout the Foundation. That he was Mallow's illegitimate son was accepted quietly
to just as wide an extent.
The fourth man blinked his little eyes stealthily. Words crept out from between thin lips. "It is
nothing to sleep over in fat triumph, this grasping of little ships. Most likely, it will but anger that
young man further."
"You think he needs motives?" questioned Forell, scornfully.
"I do, and this might, or will, save him the vexation of having to manufacture one." The fourth
man spoke slowly, "Hober Mallow worked otherwise. And Salvor Hardin. They let others take
the uncertain paths of force, while they maneuvered surely and quietly."
Forell shrugged. "This ship has proved its value. Motives are cheap and we have sold this one
at a profit." There was the satisfaction of the born Trader in that. He continued, "The young
man is of the old Empire."
"We knew that," said the second man, the big one, with rumbling discontent.
"We suspected that," corrected Forell, softly. "If a man comes with ships and wealth, with
overtures of friendliness, and with offers of trade, it is only sensible to refrain from antagonizing
him, until we are certain that the profitable mask is not a face after all. But now–"
There was a faint whining edge to the third man's voice as he spoke. "We might have been
even more careful. We might have found out first. We might have found out before allowing him
to leave. It would have been the truest wisdom."
"That has been discussed and disposed of," said Forell. He waved the subject aside with a
flatly final gesture.
"The government is soft," complained the third man. "The mayor is an idiot."
The fourth man looked at the other three in turn and removed the stub of a cigar from his
mouth. He dropped it casually into the slot at his right where it disappeared with a silent flash of
disruption.
He said sarcastically, "I trust the gentleman who last spoke is speaking through habit only. We
can afford to remember here that we are the government."
There was a murmur of agreement.
The fourth man's little eyes were on the table. "Then let us leave government policy alone. This
young man ... this stranger might have been a possible customer. There have been cases. All
three of you tried to butter him into an advance contract. We have an agreement – a
gentleman's agreement – against it, but you tried."
"So did you," growled the second man.
I know it," said the fourth, calmly.
"Then let's forget what we should have done earlier," interrupted Forell impatiently, "and
continue with what we should do now. In any case, what if we had imprisoned him, or killed
him, what then? We are not certain of his intentions even yet, and at the worst, we could not
destroy an Empire by snipping short one man's life. There might be navies upon navies waiting
just the other side of his nonreturn."
"Exactly," approved the fourth man. "Now what did you get out of your captured ship? I'm too
old for all this talking."
"It can be told in a few enough words," said Forell, grimly. "He's an Imperial general or
whatever rank corresponds to that over there. He's a young man who has proved his military
brilliance – so I am told – and who is the idol of his men. Quite a romantic career. The stories
they tell of him are no doubt half lies, but even so it makes him out to be a type of wonder
man."
"Who are the 'they'?" demanded the second man.
"The crew of the captured ship. Look, I have all their statements recorded on micro-film, which I
have in a secure place. Later on, if you wish, you can see them. You can talk to the men
yourselves, if you think it necessary. I've told you the essentials."
"How did you get it out of them? How do you know they're telling the truth?"
Forell frowned. "I wasn't gentle, good sir. I knocked them about, drugged them crazy, and used
the Probe unmercifully. They talked. You can believe them."
"In the old days," said the third man, with sudden irrelevance, "they would have used pure
psychology. Painless, you know, but very sure. No chance of deceit."
"Well, there is a good deal they had in the old days," said Forell, dryly. "These are the new
days."
"But," said the fourth man, "what did he want here, this general, this romantic wonder-man?"
There was a dogged, weary persistence about him.
Forell glanced at him sharply. "You think he confides the details of state policy to his crew?
They didn't know. There was nothing to get out of them in that respect, and I tried, Galaxy
knows."
"Which leaves us–"
"To draw our own conclusions, obviously." Forell's fingers were tapping quietly again. "The
young man is a military leader of the Empire, yet he played the pretense of being a minor
princeling of some scattered stars in an odd comer of the Periphery. That alone would assure
us that his real motives are such as it would not benefit him to have us know. Combine the
nature of his profession with the fact that the Empire has already subsidized one attack upon us
in my father's time, and the possibilities become ominous. That first attack failed. I doubt that
the Empire owes us love for that."
"There is nothing in your findings," questioned the fourth man guardedly, "that makes for
certainty? You are withholding nothing?"
Forell answered levelly, "I can't withhold anything. From here on there can be no question of
business rivalry. Unity is forced upon us."
"Patriotism?" There was a sneer in the third man's thin voice.
"Patriotism be damned," said Forell quietly. "Do you think I give two puffs of nuclear emanation
for the future Second Empire? Do you think I'd risk a single Trade mission to smooth its path?
But – do you suppose Imperial conquest will help my business or yours? If the Empire wins,
there will be a sufficient number of yearning carrion crows to crave the rewards of battle."
"And we're the rewards," added the fourth man, dryly.
The second man broke his silence suddenly, and shifted his bulk angrily, so that the chair
creaked under him. "But why talk of that. The Empire can't win, can it? There is Seldon's
assurance that we will form the Second Empire in the end. This is only another crisis. There
have been three before this."
"Only another crisis, yes!" Forell brooded. "But – in the case of the first two, we had Salvor
Hardin to guide us; in the third, there was Hober Mallow. Whom have we now?"
He looked at the others somberly and continued, "Seldon's rules of psychohistory on which it is
so comforting to rely probably have as one of the contributing variables, a certain normal
initiative on the part of the people of the Foundation themselves. Seldon's laws help those who
help themselves."
"The times make the man," said the third man. "There's another proverb for you."
"You can't count on that, not with absolute assurance," grunted Forell. "Now the way it seems
to me is this. If this is the fourth crisis, then Seldon has foreseen it. If he has, then it can be
beaten, and there should be a way of doing it.
"Now The Empire is stronger than we; it always has been. But this is the first time we are in
danger of its direct attack, so that strength becomes terribly menacing. If it can be beaten, it
must be once again as in all past crises by a method other than pure force. We must find the
weak side of our enemy and attack it there."
"And what is that weak side?" asked the fourth man. "Do you intend advancing a theory?"
"No. That is the point I'm leading up to. Our great leaders of the past always saw the weak
points of their enemies and aimed at that. But now–"
There was a helplessness in his voice, and for a moment none volunteered a comment.
Then the fourth man said, "We need spies."
Forell turned to him eagerly. "Right! I don't know when the Empire will attack. There may be
time."
"Hober Mallow himself entered the Imperial dominions," suggested the second man.
But Forell shook his head. "Nothing so direct. None of us are precisely youthful; and all of us
are rusty with red-tape and administrative detail. We need young men that are in the field
now–"
"The independent traders?" asked the fourth man.
And Forell nodded his, head and whispered, "If there is yet time–"
3. THE DEAD HAND
Bel Riose interrupted his annoyed stridings to look up hopefully when his aide entered. "Any
word of the Starlet?"
"None. The scouting party has quartered space, but the instruments have detected nothing.
Commander Yume has reported that the Fleet is ready for an immediate attack in retaliation."
The general shook his head. "No, not for a patrol ship. Not yet. Tell him to double – Wait! I'll
write out the message. Have it coded and transmitted by tight beam."
He wrote as he talked and thrust the paper at the waiting officer. "Has the Siwennian arrived
yet?"
"Not yet."
"Well, see to it that he is brought in here as soon as he does arrive."
The aide saluted crisply and left. Riose resumed his caged stride.
When the door opened a second time, it was Ducem Barr that stood on the threshold. Slowly,
in the footsteps of the ushering aide, he stepped into the garish room whose ceiling was an
ornamented holographic model of the Galaxy, and in the center of which Bel Riose stood in
field uniform.
"Patrician, good day!" The general pushed forward a chair with his foot and gestured the aide
away with a "That door is to stay closed till I open it."
He stood before the Siwennian, legs apart, hand grasping wrist behind his back, balancing
himself slowly, thoughtfully, on the balls of his feet.
Then, harshly, "Patrician, are you a loyal subject of the Emperor?"
Barr, who had maintained an indifferent silence till then, wrinkled a noncommittal brow. "I have
no cause to love Imperial rule."
"Which is a long way from saying that you would be a traitor."
"True. But the mere act of not being a traitor is also a long way from agreeing to be an active
helper."
"Ordinarily also true. But to refuse your help at this point," said Riose, deliberately, "will be
considered treason and treated as such."
Barr's eyebrows drew together. "Save your verbal cudgels for your subordinates. A simple
statement of your needs and wants will suffice me here."
Riose sat down and crossed his legs. "Barr, we had an earlier discussion half a year ago."
"About your magicians?"
"Yes. You remember what I said I would do."
Barr nodded. His arms rested limply in his lap. "You were going to visit them in their haunts,
and you've been away these four months. Did you find them?"
"Find them? That I did," cried Riose. His lips were stiff as he spoke. It seemed to require effort
to refrain from grinding molars. "Patrician, they are not magicians; they are devils. It is as far
from belief as the outer galaxies from here. Conceive it! It is a world the size of a handkerchief,
of a fingernail; with resources so petty, power so minute, a population so microscopic as would
never suffice the most backward worlds of the dusty prefects of the Dark Stars. Yet with that, a
people so proud and ambitious as to dream quietly and methodically of Galactic rule.
"Why, they are so sure of themselves that they do not even hurry. They move slowly,
phlegmatically; they speak of necessary centuries. They swallow worlds at leisure; creep
through systems with dawdling complacence.
"And they succeed. There is no one to stop them. They have built up a filthy trading community
that curls its tentacles about the systems further than their toy ships dare reach. For parsecs,
their Traders – which is what their agents call themselves – penetrate."
Ducem Barr interrupted the angry flow. "How much of this information is definite; and how much
is simply fury?"
The soldier caught his breath and grew calmer. "My fury does not blind me. I tell you I was in
worlds nearer to Siwenna than to the Foundation, where the Empire was a myth of the
distance, and where Traders were living truths. We ourselves were mistaken for Traders."
"The Foundation itself told you they aimed at Galactic dominion?"
"Told me!" Riose was violent again. "It was not a matter of telling me. The officials said nothing.
They spoke business exclusively. But I spoke to ordinary men. I absorbed the ideas of the
common folk; their 'manifest destiny,' their calm acceptance of a great future. It is a thing that
can't be hidden; a universal optimism they don't even try to hide."
The Siwennian openly displayed a certain quiet satisfaction. "You will notice that so far it would
seem to bear out quite accurately my reconstruction of events from the paltry data on the
subject that I have gathered."
"It is no doubt," replied Riose with vexed sarcasm, "a tribute to your analytical powers. It is also
a hearty and bumptious commentary on the growing danger to the domains of His Imperial
Majesty."
Barr shrugged his unconcern, and Riose leaned forward suddenly, to seize the old man's
shoulders and stare with curious gentleness into his eyes.
He said, "Now, patrician, none of that. I have no desire to be barbaric. For my part, the legacy
of Siwennian hostility to the Imperium is an odious burden, and one which I would do
everything in my power to wipe out. But my province is the military and interference in civil
affairs is impossible. It would bring about my recall and ruin my usefulness at once. You see
that? I know you see that. Between yourself and myself then, let the atrocity of forty years ago
be repaid by your vengeance upon its author and so forgotten. I need your help. I frankly admit
it."
There was a world of urgency in the young man's voice, but Ducem Barr's head shook gently
and deliberately in a negative gesture.
Riose said pleadingly, "You don't understand, patrician, and I doubt my ability to make you. I
can't argue on your ground. You're the scholar, not I. But this I can tell you. Whatever you think
of the Empire, you will admit its great services. Its armed forces have committed isolated
crimes, but in the main they have been a force for peace and civilization. It was the Imperial
navy that created the Pax Imperium that ruled over all the Galaxy for thousands of years.
Contrast the millennia of peace under the Sun-and-Spaceship of the Empire with the millennia
of interstellar anarchy that preceded it. Consider the wars and devastations of those old days
and tell me if, with all its faults, the Empire is not worth preserving.
"Consider," he drove on forcefully, "to what the outer fringe of the Galaxy is reduced in these
days of their breakaway and independence, and ask yourself if for the sake of a petty revenge
you would reduce Siwenna from its position as a province under the protection of a mighty
Navy to a barbarian world in a barbarian Galaxy, all immersed in its fragmentary independence
and its common degradation and misery."
"Is it so bad – so soon?" murmured the Siwennian.
"No," admitted Riose. "We would be safe ourselves no doubt, were our lifetimes quadrupled.
But it is for the Empire I fight; that, and a military tradition which is something for myself alone,
and which I can not transfer to you. It is a military tradition built on the Imperial institution which
I serve."
"You are getting mystical, and I always find it difficult to penetrate another person's mysticism."
"No matter. You understand the danger of this Foundation."
"It was I who pointed out what you call the danger before ever you headed outward from
Siwenna."
"Then you realize that it must be stopped in embryo or perhaps not at all. You have known of
this Foundation before anyone had heard of it. You know more about it than anyone else in the
Empire. You probably know how it might best be attacked; and you can probably forewarn me
of its countermeasures. Come, let us be friends."
Ducem Barr rose. He said flatly, "Such help as I could give you means nothing. So I will make
you free of it in the face of your strenuous demand."
"I will be the judge of its meaning."
"No, I am serious. Not all the might of the Empire could avail to crush this pygmy world."
"Why not?" Bel Riose's eyes glistened fiercely. "No, stay where you are. I'll tell you when you
may leave. Why not? If you think I underestimate this enemy I have discovered, you are wrong.
Patrician," he spoke reluctantly, "I lost a ship on my return. I have no proof that it fell into the
hands of the Foundation; but it has not been located since and were it merely an accident, its
dead hulk should, certainly have been found along the route we took. It is not an important loss
– less than the tenth part of a fleabite, but it may mean that the Foundation has already opened
hostilities. Such eagerness and such disregard for consequences might mean secret forces of
which I know nothing. Can you help me then by answering a specific question? What is their
military power?"
"I haven't any notion."
"Then explain yourself on your own terms. Why do you say the Empire can not defeat this small
enemy?"
The Siwennian seated himself once more and looked away from Riose's fixed glare. He spoke
heavily, "Because I have faith in the principles of psychohistory. It is a strange science. It
reached mathematical maturity with one man, Hari Seldon, and died with him, for no man since
has been capable of manipulating its intricacies. But in that short period, it proved itself the
most powerful instrument ever invented for the study of humanity. Without pretending to predict
the actions of individual humans, it formulated definite laws capable of mathematical analysis
and extrapolation to govern and predict the mass action of human groups."
"So–"
"It was that psychohistory which Seldon and the group he worked with applied in full force to
the establishment of the Foundation. The place, time, and conditions all conspire
mathematically and so, inevitably, to the development of a Second Galactic Empire."
Riose's voice trembled with indignation. "You mean that this art of his predicts that I would
attack the Foundation and lose such and such a battle for such and such a reason? You are
trying to say that I am a silly robot following a predetermined course into destruction."
"No," replied the old patrician, sharply. "I have already said that the science had nothing to do
with individual actions. It is the vaster background that has been foreseen."
"Then we stand clasped tightly in the forcing hand of the Goddess of Historical Necessity."
"Of Psychohistorical Necessity," prompted Barr, softly.
"And if I exercise my prerogative of freewill? If I choose to attack next year, or not to attack at
all? How pliable is the Goddess? How resourceful?"
Barr shrugged. "Attack now or never; with a single ship, or all the force in the Empire; by
military force or economic pressure; by candid declaration of war or by treacherous ambush.
Do whatever you wish in your fullest exercise of freewill. You will still lose."
"Because of Hari Seldon's dead hand?"
"Because of the dead hand of the mathematics of human behavior that can neither be stopped,
swerved, nor delayed."
The two faced each other in deadlock, until the general stepped back.
He said simply, "I'll take that challenge. It's a dead hand against a living will."
4. THE EMPEROR
CLEON II commonly called "The Great." The last strong Emperor of the First Empire, he is
important for the political and artistic renaissance that took place during his long reign. He is
best known to romance, however, for his connection with Bel Riose, and to the common man,
he is simply "Riose's Emperor." It is important not to allow events of the last year of his reign to
overshadow forty years of...
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
Cleon II was Lord of the Universe. Cleon II also suffered from a painful and undiagnosed
ailment. By the queer twists of human affairs, the two statements are not mutually exclusive,
nor even particularly incongruous. There have been a wearisomely large number of precedents
in history.
But Cleon II cared nothing for such precedents. To meditate upon a long list of similar cases
would not ameliorate personal suffering an electron's worth. It soothed him as little to think that
where his great-grandfather had been the pirate ruler of a dust-speck planet, he himself slept in
the pleasure palace of Ammenetik the Great, as heir of a line of Galactic rulers stretching
backward into a tenuous past. It was at present no source of comfort to him that the efforts of
his father had cleansed the realm of its leprous patches of rebellion and restored it to the peace
and unity it had enjoyed under Stanel VI; that, as a consequence, in the twenty-five years of his
reign, not one cloud of revolt had misted his burnished glory.
The Emperor of the Galaxy and the Lord of All whimpered as he lolled his head backward into
the invigorating plane of force about his pillows. It yielded in a softness that did not touch, and
at the pleasant tingle, Cleon relaxed a bit. He sat up with difficulty and stared morosely at the
distant walls of the grand chamber. It was a bad room to be alone in. It was too big. All the
rooms were too big.
But better to be alone during these crippling bouts than to endure the prinking of the courtiers,
their lavish sympathy, their soft, condescending dullness. Better to be alone than to watch
those insipid masks behind which spun the tortuous speculations on the chances of death and
the fortunes of the succession.
His thoughts hurried him. There were his three sons; three straight-backed youths full of
promise and virtue. Where did they disappear on these bad days? Waiting, no doubt. Each
watching the other; and all watching him.
He stirred uneasily. And now Brodrig craved audience. The low-born, faithful Brodrig; faithful
because he was hated with a unanimous and cordial hatred that was the only point of
agreement between the dozen cliques that divided his court.
Brodrig – the faithful favorite, who had to be faithful, since unless he owned the fastest
speed-ship in the Galaxy and took to it the day of the Emperor's death, it would be the
radiation-chamber the day after.
Cleon II touched the smooth knob on the arm of his great divan, and the huge door at the end
of the room dissolved to transparency.
Brodrig advanced along the crimson carpet, and knelt to kiss the Emperor's limp hand.
"Your health, sire?" asked the Privy Secretary in a low tone of becoming anxiety.
"I live," snapped the Emperor with exasperation, "if you can call it life where every scoundrel
who can read a book of medicine uses me as a blank and receptive field for his feeble
experiments. If there is a conceivable remedy, chemical, physical, or nuclear, which has not yet
been tried, why then, some learned babbler from the far comers of the realm will arrive
tomorrow to try it. And still another newly-discovered book, or forgery morelike, will be used as
authority.
"By my father's memory," he rumbled savagely, "it seems there is not a biped extant who can
study a disease before his eyes with those same eyes. There is not one who can count a
pulse-beat without a book of the ancients before him. I'm sick and they call it 'unknown.' The
fools! If in the course of millennia, human bodies learn new methods of falling askew, it remains
uncovered by the studies of the ancients and uncurable forevermore. The ancients should be
alive now, or I then."
The Emperor ran down to a low-breathed curse while Brodrig waited dutifully. Cleon II said
peevishly, "How many are waiting outside?"
He jerked his head in the direction of the door.
Brodrig said patiently, "The Great Hall holds the usual number."
"Well, let them wait. State matters occupy me. Have the Captain of the Guard announce it. Or
wait, forget the state matters. Just have it announced I hold no audience, and let the Captain of
the Guard look doleful. The jackals among them may betray themselves." The Emperor
sneered nastily.
"There is a rumor, sire," said Brodrig, smoothly, "that it is your heart that troubles you."
The Emperor's smile was little removed from the previous sneer. "It will hurt others more than
myself if any act prematurely on that rumor. But what is it you want. Let's have this over."
Brodrig rose from his kneeling posture at a gesture of permission and said, "It concerns
General Bel Riose, the Military Governor of Siwenna."
"Riose?" Cleon II frowned heavily. "I don't place him. Wait, is he the one who sent that quixotic
message some months back? Yes, I remember. He panted for permission to enter a career of
conquest for the glory of the Empire and Emperor."
"Exactly, sire."
The Emperor laughed shortly. "Did you think I had such generals left me, Brodrig? He seems to
be a curious atavism. What was the answer? I believe you took care of it."
"I did, sire. He was instructed to forward additional information and to take no steps involving
naval action without further orders from the Imperium."
"Hmp. Safe enough. Who is this Riose? Was he ever at court?"
Brodrig nodded and his mouth twisted ever so little. "He began his career as a cadet in the
Guards ten years back. He had part in that affair off the Lemul Cluster."
"The Lemul Cluster? You know, my memory isn't quite – Was that the time a young soldier
saved two ships of the line from a head-on collision by ... uh ... something or other?" He waved
a hand impatiently. "I don't remember the details. It was something heroic."
"Riose was that soldier. He received a promotion for it," Brodrig said dryly, "and an appointment
to field duty as captain of a ship."
"And now Military Governor of a border system and still young. Capable man, Brodrig!"
"Unsafe, sire. He lives in the past. He is a dreamer of ancient times, or rather, of the myths of
what ancient times used to be. Such men are harmless in themselves, but their queer lack of
realism makes them fools for others." He added, "His men, I understand, are completely under
his control. He is one of your popular generals."
"Is he?" the Emperor mused. "Well, come, Brodrig, I would not wish to be served entirely by
incompetents. They certainly set no enviable standard for faithfulness themselves."
"An incompetent traitor is no danger. It is rather the capable men who must be watched."
"You among them, Brodrig?" Cleon II laughed and then grimaced with pain. "Well, then, you
may forget the lecture for the while. What new development is there in the matter of this young
conqueror? I hope you haven't come merely to reminisce."
"Another message, sire, has been received from General Riose."
"Oh? And to what effect?"
"He has spied out the land of these barbarians and advocates an expedition in force. His
arguments are long and fairly tedious. It is not worth annoying Your Imperial Majesty with it at
present, during your indisposition. Particularly since it will be discussed at length during the
session of the Council of Lords." He glanced sidewise at the Emperor.
Cleon II frowned. "The Lords? Is it a question for them, Brodrig? It will mean further demands
for a broader interpretation of the Charter. It always comes to that."
"It can't be avoided, sire. It might have been better if your august father could have beaten
down the last rebellion without granting the Charter. But since it is here, we must endure it for
the while."
"You're right, I suppose. Then the Lords it must be. But why all this solemnity, man? It is, after
all, a minor point. Success on a remote border with limited troops is scarcely a state affair."
Brodrig smiled narrowly. He said coolly, "It is an affair of a romantic idiot; but even a romantic
idiot can be a deadly weapon when an unromantic rebel uses him as a tool. Sire, the man was
popular here and is popular there. He is young. If he annexes a vagrant barbarian planet or
two, he will become a conqueror. Now a young conqueror who has proven his ability to rouse
the enthusiasm of pilots, miners, tradesmen and suchlike rabble is dangerous at any time. Even
if he lacked the desire to do to you as your august father did to the usurper, Ricker, then one of
our loyal Lords of the Domain may decide to use him as his weapon."
Cleon II moved an arm hastily and stiffened with pain. Slowly he relaxed, but his smile was
weak, and his voice a whisper. "You are a valuable subject, Brodrig. You always suspect far
more than is necessary, and I have but to take half your suggested precautions to be utterly
safe. We'll put it up to the Lords. We shall see what they say and take our measure accordingly.
The young man, I suppose, has made no hostile moves yet."
"He report none. But already he asks for reinforcements."
"Reinforcements!" The Emperor's eyes narrowed with wonder. "What force has he?"
"Ten ships of the line, sire, with a full complement of auxiliary vessels. Two of the ships are
equipped with motors salvaged from the old Grand Fleet, and one has a battery of power
artillery from the same source. The other ships are new ones of the last fifty years, but are
serviceable, nevertheless."
"Ten ships would seem adequate for any reasonable undertaking. Why, with less than ten ships
my father won his first victories against the usurper. Who are these barbarians he's fighting?"
The Privy Secretary raised a pair of supercilious eyebrows. "He refers to them as 'the
Foundation.'"
"The Foundation? What is it?"
"There is no record of it, sire. I have searched the archives carefully. The area of the Galaxy
indicated falls within the ancient province of Anacreon, which two centuries since gave itself up
to brigandage, barbarism, and anarchy. There is no planet known as Foundation in the
province, however. There was a vague reference to a group of scientists sent to that province
just before its separation from our protection. They were to prepare an Encyclopedia." He
smiled thinly. "I believe they called it the Encyclopedia Foundation."
"Well," the Emperor considered it somberly, "that seems a tenuous connection to advance."
"I'm not advancing it, sire. No word was ever received from that expedition after the growth of
anarchy in that region. If their descendants still live and retain their name, then they have
reverted to barbarism most certainly."
"And so he wants reinforcements." The Emperor bent a fierce glance at his secretary. "This is
most peculiar; to propose to fight savages with ten ships and to ask for more before a blow is
struck. And yet I begin to remember this Riose; he was a handsome boy of loyal family.
Brodrig, there are complications in this that I don't penetrate. There may be more importance in
it than would seem."
His fingers played idly with the gleaming sheet that covered his stiffened legs. He said, "I need
a man out there; one with eyes, brains and loyalty. Brodrig–"
The secretary bent a submissive head. "And the ships, sire?"
"Not yet!" The Emperor moaned softly as he shifted his position in gentle stages. He pointed a
feeble finger, "Not till we know more. Convene the Council of Lords for this day week. It will be
a good opportunity for the new appropriation as well. I'll put that through or lives will end."
He leaned his aching head into the soothing tingle of the force-field pillow, "Go now, Brodrig,
and send in the doctor. He's the worst bumbler of the lot."
5. THE WAR BEGINS
From the radiating point of Siwenna, the forces of the Empire reached out cautiously into the
black unknown of the Periphery. Giant ships passed the vast distances that separated the
vagrant stars at the Galaxy's rim, and felt their way around the outermost edge of Foundation
influence.
Worlds isolated in their new barbarism of two centuries felt the sensation once again of Imperial
overlords upon their soil. Allegiance was sworn in the face of the massive artillery covering
capital cities.
Garrisons were left; garrisons of men in Imperial uniform with the Spaceship-and-Sun insignia
upon their shoulders. The old men took notice and remembered once again the forgotten tales
of their grandfathers' fathers of the times when the universe was big, and rich, and peaceful
and that same Spaceship-and-Sun ruled all.
Then the great ships passed on to weave their line of forward bases further around the
Foundation. And as each world was knotted into its proper place in the fabric, the report went
back to Bel Riose at the General Headquarters he had established on the rocky barrenness of
a wandering sunless planet.
Now Riose relaxed and smiled grimly at Ducem Barr. "Well, what do you think, patrician?"
"I? Of what value are my thoughts? I am not a military man." He took in with one wearily
distasteful glance the crowded disorder of the rock-bound room which had been carved out of
the wall of a cavern of artificial air, light, and heat which marked the single bubble of life in the
vastness of a bleak world.
"For the help I could give you," he muttered, "or would want to give you, you might return me to
Siwenna."
"Not yet. Not yet." The general turned his chair to the comer which held the huge,
brilliantly-transparent sphere that mapped the old Imperial prefect of Anacreon and its
neighboring sectors. "Later, when this is over, you will go back to your books and to more. I'll
see to it that the estates of your family are restored to you and to your children for the rest of
time."
"Thank you," said Barr, with faint irony, "but I lack your faith in the happy outcome of all this."
Riose laughed harshly, "Don't start your prophetic croakings again. This map speaks louder
than all your woeful theories." He caressed its curved invisible outline gently. "Can you read a
map in radial projection? You can? Well, here, see for yourself. The stars in gold represent the
Imperial territories. The red stars are those in subjection to the Foundation and the pink are
those which are probably within the economic sphere of influence. Now watch–"
Riose's hand covered a rounded knob, and slowly an area of hard, white pinpoints changed into
a deepening blue. Like an inverted cup they folded about the red and the pink.
"Those blue stars have been taken over by my forces," said Riose with quiet satisfaction, "and
they still advance. No opposition has appeared anywhere. The barbarians are quiet. And
particularly, no opposition has come from Foundation forces. They sleep peacefully and well."
"You spread your force thinly, don't you?" asked Barr.
"As a matter of fact," said Riose, "despite appearances, I don't. The key points which I garrison
and fortify are relatively few, but they are carefully chosen. The result is that the force
expended is small, but the strategic result great. There are many advantages, more than would
ever appear to anyone who hasn't made a careful study of spatial tactics, but it is apparent to
anyone, for instance, that I can base an attack from any point in an inclosing sphere, and that
when I am finished it will be impossible for the Foundation to attack at flank or rear. I shall have
no flank or rear with respect to them.
"This strategy of the Previous Enclosure has been tried before, notably in the campaigns of
Loris VI, some two thousand years ago, but always imperfectly; always with the knowledge and
attempted interference of the enemy. This is different."
"The ideal textbook case?" Barr's voice was languid and indifferent.
Riose was impatient, "You still think my forces will fail?"
"They must."
"You understand that there is no case in military history where an Enclosure has been
completed that the attacking forces have not eventually won, except where an outside Navy
exists in sufficient force to break the Enclosure."
"If you say so."
"And you still adhere to your faith."
"Yes."
Riose shrugged. "Then do so."
Barr allowed the angry silence to continue for a moment, then asked quietly, "Have you
received an answer from the Emperor?"
Riose removed a cigarette from a wall container behind his head, placed a filter tip between his
lips and puffed it aflame carefully. He said, "You mean my request for reinforcements? It came,
but that's all. Just the answer."
"No ships."
"None. I half-expected that. Frankly, patrician, I should never have allowed myself to be
stampeded by your theories into requesting them in the first place. It puts me in a false light."
"Does it?"
"Definitely. Ships are at a premium. The civil wars of the last two centuries have smashed up
more than half of the Grand Fleet and what's left is in pretty shaky condition. You know it isn't
as if the ships we build these days are worth anything. I don't think there's a man in the Galaxy
today who can build a first-rate hypernuclear motor."
"I knew that," said the Siwennian. His eyes were thoughtful and introspective. "I didn't know that
you knew it. So his Imperial Majesty can spare no ships. Psychohistory could have predicted
that; in fact, it probably did. I should say that Hari Seldon's dead hand wins the opening round."
Riose answered sharply, "I have enough ships as it is. Your Seldon wins nothing. Should the
situation turn more serious, then more ships will be available. As yet, the Emperor does not
know all the story."
"Indeed? What haven't you told him?"
"Obviously – your theories." Riose looked sardonic. "The story is, with all respect to you,
inherently improbable. If developments warrant; if events supply me with proof, then, but only
then, would I make out the case of mortal danger.
"And in addition," Riose drove on, casually, "the story, unbolstered by fact, has a flavor of lese
majeste that could scarcely be pleasant to His Imperial Majesty."
The old patrician smiled. "You mean that telling him his august throne is in danger of
subversion by a parcel of ragged barbarians from the ends of the universe is not a warning to
be believed or appreciated. Then you expect nothing from him."
"Unless you count a special envoy as something."
"And why a special envoy?"
"It's an old custom. A direct representative of the crown is present on every military campaign
which is under government auspices."
"Really? Why?"
"It's a method of preserving the symbol of personal Imperial leadership in all campaigns. It's
gained a secondary function of insuring the fidelity of generals. It doesn't always succeed in
that respect."
"You'll find that inconvenient, general. Extraneous authority, I mean."
"I don't doubt that," Riose reddened faintly, "but it can't be helped–"
The receiver at the general's hand glowed warmly, and with an unobtrusive jar, the cylindered
communication popped into its slot. Riose unrolled it, "Good! This is it!"
Ducem Barr raised a mildly questioning eyebrow.
Riose said, "You know we've captured one of these Trader people. Alive – and with his ship
intact."
"I've heard talk of it."
"Well, they've just brought him in, and we'll have him here in a minute. You keep your seat,
patrician. I want you here when I'm questioning him. It's why I asked you here today in the first
place. You may understand him where I might miss important points."
The door signal sounded and a touch of the general's toe swung the door wide. The man who
stood on the threshold was tall and bearded, wore a short coat of a soft, leathery plastic, with
an attached hood shoved back on his neck. His hands were free, and if he noticed the men
about him were armed, he did not trouble to indicate it.
He stepped in casually, and looked about with calculating eyes. He favored the general with a
rudimentary wave of the hand and a half nod.
"Your name?" demanded Riose, crisply.
"Lathan Devers." The trader hooked his thumbs into his wide and gaudy belt. "Are you the boss
here?"
"You are a trader of the Foundation?"
"That's right. Listen, if you're the boss, you'd better tell your hired men here to lay off my cargo."
The general raised his head and regarded the prisoner coldly. "Answer questions. Do not
volunteer orders."
"All right. I'm agreeable. But one of your boys blasted a two-foot hole in his chest already, by
sticking his fingers where he wasn't supposed to."
Riose shifted his gaze to the lieutenant in charge. "Is this man telling the truth? Your report,
Vrank, had it that no lives were lost."
"None were, sir," the lieutenant spoke stiffly, apprehensively, "at the time. There was later some
disposition to search the ship, there having arisen a rumor that a woman was aboard. Instead,
sir, many instruments of unknown nature were located, instruments which the prisoner claims
to be his stock in trade. One of them flashed on handling, and the soldier holding it died."
The general turned back to the trader. "Does your ship carry nuclear explosives?"
"Galaxy, no. What for? That fool grabbed a nuclear puncher, wrong end forward and set at
maximum dispersion. You're not supposed to do that. Might as well point a neut-gun at your
head. I'd have stopped him, if five men weren't sitting on my chest."
Riose gestured at the waiting guard, "You go. The captured ship is to he sealed against all
intrusion. Sit down, Devers."
The trader did so, in the spot indicated, and withstood stolidly the hard scrutiny of the Imperial
general and the curious glance of the Siwennian patrician.
Riose said, "You're a sensible man, Devers."
"Thank you. Are you impressed by my face, or do you want something? Tell you what, though.
I'm a good business man."
"It's about the same thing. You surrendered your ship when you might have decided to waste
our ammunition and have yourself blown to electron-dust. It could result in good treatment for
you, if you continue that sort of outlook on life."
"Good treatment is what I mostly crave, boss."
"Good, and co-operation is what I mostly crave." Riose smiled, and said in a low aside to
Ducem Barr, "I hope the word 'crave' means what I think it does. Did you ever hear such a
barbarous jargon?"
Devers said blandly, "Right. I check you. But what kind of co-operation are you talking about,
boss? To tell you straight, I don't know where I stand." He looked about him, "Where's this
place, for instance, and – what's the idea?"
"Ah, I've neglected the other half of the introductions. I apologize." Riose was in good humor.
"That gentleman is Ducem Barr, Patrician of the Empire. I am Bel Riose, Peer of the Empire,
and General of the Third Class in the armed forces of His Imperial Majesty."
The trader's jaw slackened. Then, "The Empire? I mean the old Empire they taught us about at
school? Huh! Funny! I always had the sort of notion that it didn't exist any more."
"Look about you. It does," said Riose grimly.
"Might have known it though," and Lathan Devers pointed his beard at the ceiling. "That was a
mightily polished-looking set of craft that took my tub. No kingdom of the Periphery could have
turned them out." His brow furrowed. "So what's the game, boss? Or do I call you general?"
"Me game is war."
"Empire versus Foundation, that it?"
"Right."
"Why?"
"I think you know why."
The trader stared sharply and shook his head.
Riose let the other deliberate, then said softly, "I'm sure you know why."
Lathan Devers muttered, "Warm here," and stood up to remove his hooded jacket. Then he sat
down again and stretched his legs out before him.
"You know," he said, comfortably, "I figure you're thinking I ought to jump up with a whoop and
lay about me. I can catch you before you could move if I choose my time, and this old fellow
who sits there and doesn't say anything couldn't do much to stop me."
"But you won't," said Riose, confidently.
"I won't," agreed Devers, amiably. "First off, killing you wouldn't stop the war, I suppose. There
are more generals where you came from."
"Very accurately calculated."
"Besides which, I'd probably be slammed down about two seconds after I got you, and killed
fast, or maybe slow, depending. But I'd be killed, and I never like to count on that when I'm
making plans. It doesn't pay off."
"I said you were a sensible man."
"But there's one thing I would like, boss. I'd like you to tell me what you mean when you say I
know why you're jumping us. I don't; and guessing games bother me no end."
"Yes? Ever hear of Hari Seldon?"
"No. I said I don't like guessing games."
Riose flicked a side glance at Ducem Barr who smiled with a narrow gentleness and resumed
his inwardly-dreaming expression.
Riose said with a grimace, "Don't you play games, Devers. There is a tradition, or a fable, or
sober history – I don't care what – upon your Foundation, that eventually you will found the
Second Empire. I know quite a detailed version of Hari Seldon's psychohistorical claptrap, and
your eventual plans of aggression against the Empire."
"That so?" Devers nodded thoughtfully. "And who told you all that?"
"Does that matter?" said Riose with dangerous smoothness. "You're here to question nothing. I
want what you know about the Seldon Fable."
"But if it's a Fable–"
"Don't play with words, Devers."
"I'm not. In fact, I'll give it to you straight. You know all I know about it. It's silly stuff, half-baked.
Every world has its yams; you can't keep it away from them. Yes, I've heard that sort of talk;
Seldon, Second Empire, and so on. They put kids to sleep at night with the stuff. The young
squirts curl up in the spare rooms with their pocket projectors and suck up Seldon thrillers. But
it's strictly non-adult. Nonintelligent adult, anyway." The trader shook his head.
The Imperial general's eyes were dark. "Is that really so? You waste your lies, man. I've been
on the planet, Terminus. I know your Foundation. I've looked it in the face."
"And you ask me? Me, when I haven't kept foot on it for two months at a piece in ten years. You
are wasting your time. But go ahead with your war, if it's fables you're after."
And Barr spoke for the first time, mildly, "You are so confident then that the Foundation will
win?"
The trader turned. He flushed faintly and an old scar on one temple showed whitely, "Hm-m-m,
the silent partner. How'd you squeeze that out of what I said, doc?"
Riose nodded very slightly at Barr, and the Siwennian continued in a low voice, "Because the
notion would bother you if you thought your world might lose this war, and suffer the bitter
reapings of defeat, I know. My world once did, and still does."
Lathan Devers fumbled his beard, looked from one of his opponents to the other, then laughed
shortly. "Does he always talk like that, boss? Listen," he grew serious, "what's defeat? I've seen
wars and I've seen defeats. What if the winner does take over? Who's bothered? Me? Guys like
me?" He shook his head in derision.
"Get this," the trader spoke forcefully and earnestly, "there are five or six fat slobs who usually
run an average planet. They get the rabbit punch, but I'm not losing peace of mind over them.
See. The people? The ordinary run of guys? Sure, some get killed, and the rest pay extra taxes
for a while. But it settles itself out; it runs itself down. And then it's the old situation again with a
different five or six."
Ducem Barr's nostrils flared, and the tendons of his old right hand jerked; but he said nothing.
Lathan Devers' eyes were on him. They missed nothing. He said, "Look. I spend my life in
space for my five-and-dime gadgets and my beer-and-pretzel kickback from the Combines.
There's fat fellows back there," his thumb jerked over his shoulder and back, "that sit home and
collect my year's income every minute – out of skimmings from me and more like me. Suppose
you run the Foundation. You'll still need us. You'll need us more than ever the Combines do –
because you'd not know your way around, and we could bring in the hard cash. We'd make a
better deal with the Empire. Yes, we would; and I'm a man of business. If it adds up to a plus
mark, I'm for it."
And he stared at the two with sardonic belligerence.
The silence remained unbroken for minutes, and then a cylinder rattled into its slot. The general
flipped it open, glanced at the neat printing and in-circuited the visuals with a sweep.
"Prepare plan indicating position of each ship in action. Await orders on full-armed defensive."
He reached for his cape. As he fastened it about his shoulders, he whispered in a stiff-lipped
monotone to Barr, "I'm leaving this man to you. I'll expect results. This is war and I can be cruel
to failures. Remember!" He left, with a salute to both.
Lathan Devers looked after him, "Well, something's hit him where it hurts. What goes on?"
"A battle, obviously," said Barr, gruffly. "The forces of the Foundation are coming out for their
first battle. You'd better come along."
There were armed soldiers in the room. Their bearing was respectful and their faces were hard.
Devers followed the proud old Siwennian patriarch out of the room.
The room to which they were led was smaller, barer. It contained two beds, a visi-screen, and
shower and sanitary facilities. The soldiers marched out, and the thick door boomed hollowly
shut.
"Hmp?" Devers stared disapprovingly about. "This looks permanent."
"It is," said Barr, shortly. The old Siwennian turned his back.
The trader said irritably, "What's your game, doc?"
"I have no game. You're in my charge, that's all."
The trader rose and advanced. His bulk towered over the unmoving patrician. "Yes? But you're
in this cell with me and when you were marched here the guns were pointed just as hard at you
as at me. Listen, you were all boiled up about my notions on the subject of war and peace."
He waited fruitlessly, "All fight, let me ask you something. You said your country was licked
once. By whom? Comet people from the outer nebulae?"
Barr looked up. "By the Empire."
"That so? Then what are you doing here?"
Barr maintained an eloquent silence.
The trader thrust out a lower lip and nodded his head slowly. He slipped off the flat-linked
bracelet that hugged his fight wrist and held it out. "What do you think of that?" He wore the
mate to it on his left.
The Siwennian took the ornament. He responded slowly to the trader's gesture and put it on.
The odd tingling at the wrist passed away quickly.
Devers' voice changed at once. "Right, doc, you've got the action now. Just speak casually. If
this room is wired, they won't get a thing. That's a Field Distorter you've got there; genuine
Mallow design. Sells for twenty-five credits on any world from here to the outer rim. You get it
free. Hold your lips still when you talk and take it easy. You've got to get the trick of it."
Ducem Barr was suddenly weary. The trader's boring eyes were luminous and urging. He felt
unequal to their demands.
Barr said, "What do you want?" The words slurred from between unmoving lips.
"I've told you. You make mouth noises like what we call a patriot. Yet your own world has been
mashed up by the Empire, and here you are playing ball with the Empire's fair-haired general.
Doesn't make sense, does it?"
Barr said, "I have done my part. A conquering Imperial viceroy is dead because of me."
"That so? Recently?"
"Forty years ago."
"Forty ... years ... ago!" The words seemed to have meaning to the trader. He frowned, "That's
a long time to live on memories. Does that young squirt in the general's uniform know about it?"
Barr nodded.
Devers' eyes were dark with thought. "You want the Empire to win?"
And the old Siwennian patrician broke out in sudden deep anger, "May the Empire and all its
works perish in universal catastrophe. All Siwenna prays that daily. I had brothers once, a
sister, a father. But I have children now, grandchildren. The general knows where to find them."
Devers waited.
Barr continued in a whisper, "But that would not stop me if the results in view warranted the
risk. They would know how to die."
The trader said gently, "You killed a viceroy once, huh? You know, I recognize a few things. We
once had a mayor, Hober Mallow his name was. He visited Siwenna; that's your world, isn't it?
He met a man named Barr."
Ducem Barr stared hard, suspiciously. "What do you know of this?"
"What every trader on the Foundation knows. You might be a smart old fellow put in here to get
on my right side. Sure, they'd point guns at you, and you'd hate the Empire and be all-out for its
smashing. Then I'd fall all over you and pour out my heart to you, and wouldn't the general be
pleased. There's not much chance of that, doc.
"But just the same I'd like to have you prove that you're the son of Onum Barr of Siwenna – the
sixth and youngest who escaped the massacre."
Ducem Barr's hand shook as he opened the flat metal box in a wall recess. The metal object he
withdrew clanked softly as he thrust it into the trader's hands. "Look at that," he said.
Devers stared. He held the swollen central link of the chain close to his eyes and swore softly.
"That's Mallow's monogram, or I'm a space-struck rookie, and the design is fifty years old if it's
a day."
He looked up and smiled.
"Shake, doc. A man-sized nuclear shield is all the proof I need," and he held out his large hand.
6. THE FAVORITE
The tiny ships had appeared out of the vacant depths and darted into the midst of the Armada.
Without a shot or a burst of energy, they weaved through the ship-swollen area, then blasted
on and out, while the Imperial wagons turned after them like lumbering beasts. There were two
noiseless flares that pinpointed space as two of the tiny gnats shriveled in atomic disintegration,
and the rest were gone.
The great ships searched, then returned to their original task, and world by world, the great web
of the Enclosure continued.
Brodrig's uniform was stately; carefully tailored and as carefully worn. His walk through the
gardens of the obscure planet Wanda, now temporary Imperial headquarters, was leisurely; his
expression was somber.
Bel Riose walked with him, his field uniform open at the collar, and doleful in its monotonous
gray-black.
Riose indicated the smooth black bench under the fragrant tree-fern whose large spatulate
leaves lifted flatly against the white sun. "See that, sir. It is a relic of the Imperium. The
ornamented benches, built for lovers, linger on, fresh and useful, while the factories and the
palaces collapse into unremembered ruin."
He seated himself, while Cleon II's Privy Secretary stood erect before him and clipped the
leaves above neatly with precise swings of his ivory staff.
Riose crossed his legs and offered a cigarette to the other. He fingered one himself as he
spoke, "It is what one would expect from the enlightened wisdom of His Imperial Majesty to
send so competent an observer as yourself. It relieves any anxiety I might have felt that the
press of more important and more immediate business might perhaps force into the shadows a
small campaign on the Periphery."
"The eyes of the Emperor are everywhere," said Brodrig, mechanically. "We do not
underestimate the importance of the campaign; yet still it would seem that too great an
emphasis is being placed upon its difficulty. Surely their little ships are no such barrier that we
must move through the intricate preliminary maneuver of an Enclosure."
Riose flushed, but he maintained his equilibrium. "I can not risk the lives of my men, who are
few enough, or the destruction of my ships which are irreplaceable, by a too-rash attack. The
establishment of an Enclosure will quarter my casualties in the ultimate attack, howsoever
difficult it be. The military reasons for that I took the liberty to explain yesterday."
"Well, well, I am not a military man. In this case, you assure me that what seems patently and
obviously right is, in reality, wrong. We will allow that. Yet your caution shoots far beyond that.
In your second communication, you requested reinforcements. And these, against an enemy
poor, small, and barbarous, with whom you have had not one' skirmish at the time. To desire
more forces under the circumstances would savor almost of incapacity or worse, had not your
earlier career given sufficient proof of your boldness and imagination."
"I thank you," said the general, coldly, "but I would remind you that there is a difference
between boldness and blindness. There is a place for a decisive gamble when you know your
enemy and can calculate the risks at least roughly; but to move at all against an unknown
enemy is boldness in itself. You might as well ask why the same man sprints safely across an
obstacle course in the day, and falls over the furniture in his room at night."
Brodrig swept away the other's words with a neat flirt of the fingers. "Dramatic, but not
satisfactory. You have been to this barbarian world yourself. You have in addition this enemy
prisoner you coddle, this trader. Between yourself and the prisoner you are not in a night fog."
"No? I pray you to remember that a world which has developed in isolation for two centuries
can not be interpreted to the point of intelligent attack by a month's visit. I am a soldier, not a
cleft-chinned, barrel-chested hero of a subetheric trimensional thriller. Nor can a single
prisoner, and one who is an obscure member of an economic group which has no close
connection with the enemy world introduce me to all the inner secrets of enemy strategy."
"You have questioned him?"
"I have."
"Well?"
"It has been useful, but not vitally so. His ship is tiny, of no account. He sells little toys which
are amusing if nothing else. I have a few of the cleverest which I intend sending to the Emperor
as curiosities. Naturally, there is a good deal about the ship and its workings which I do not
understand, but then I am not a tech-man."
"But you have among you those who are," pointed out Brodrig.
"I, too, am aware of that," replied the general in faintly caustic tones. "But the fools have far to
go before they could meet my needs. I have already sent for clever men who can understand
the workings of the odd nuclear field-circuits the ship contains. I have received no answer."
"Men of that type can not be spared, general. Surely, there must be one man of your vast
province who understands nucleics."
"Were there such a one, I would have him heal the limping, invalid motors that power two of my
small fleet of ships. Two ships of my meager ten that can not fight a major battle for lack of
sufficient power supply. One fifth of my force condemned to the carrion activity of consolidating
positions behind the lines."
The secretary's fingers fluttered impatiently. "Your position is not unique in that respect,
general. The Emperor has similar troubles."
The general threw away his shredded, never-lit cigarette, lit another, and shrugged. "Well, it is
beside the immediate point, this lack of first-class tech-men. Except that I might have made
more progress with my prisoner were my Psychic Probe in proper order."
The secretary's eyebrows lifted. "You have a Probe?"
"An old one. A superannuated one which fails me the one time I needed it. I set it up during the
prisoner's sleep, and received nothing. So much for the Probe. I have tried it on my own men
and the reaction is quite proper, but again there is not one among my staff of tech-men who
can tell me why it fails upon the prisoner. Ducem Barr, who is a theoretician of parts, though no
mechanic, says the psychic structure of the prisoner may be unaffected by the Probe since
from childhood he has been subjected to alien environments and neural stimuli. I don't know.
But he may yet be useful. I save him in that hope."
Brodrig leaned on his staff. A shall see if a specialist is available in the capital. In the
meanwhile, what of this other man you just mentioned, this Siwennian? You keep too many
enemies in your good graces."
"He knows the enemy. He, too, I keep for future reference and the help he may afford me."
"But he is a Siwennian and the son of a proscribed rebel."
"He is old and powerless, and his family acts as hostage."
"I see. Yet I think that I should speak to this trader, myself."
"Certainly."
"Alone," the secretary added coldly, making his point.
"Certainly," repeated Riose, blandly. "As a loyal subject of the Emperor, I accept his personal
representative as my superior. However, since the trader is at the permanent base, you will
have to leave the front areas at an interesting moment."
"Yes? Interesting in what way?"
"Interesting in that the Enclosure is complete today. Interesting in that within the week, the
Twentieth Fleet of the Border advances inward towards the core of resistance." Riose smiled
and turned away.
In a vague way, Brodrig felt punctured.
7. BRIBERY
Sergeant Mori Luk made an ideal soldier of the ranks. He came from the huge agricultural
planets of the Pleiades where only army life could break the bond to the soil and the unavailing
life of drudgery; and he was typical of that background. Unimaginative enough to face danger
without fear, he was strong and agile enough to face it successfully. He accepted orders
instantly, drove the men under him unbendingly and adored his general unswervingly.
And yet with that, he was of a sunny nature. If he killed a man in the line of duty without a scrap
of hesitation, it was also without a scrap of animosity.
That Sergeant Luk should signal at the door before entering was further a sign of tact, for he
would have been perfectly within his rights to enter without signaling.
The two within looked up from their evening meal and one reached out with his foot to cut off
the cracked voice which rattled out of the battered pocket-transmitter with bright liveliness.
"More books?" asked Lathan Devers.
The sergeant held out the tightly-wound cylinder of film and scratched his neck. "It belongs to
Engineer Orre, but he'll have to have it back. He's going to send it to his kids, you know, like
what you might call a souvenir, you know."
Ducem Barr turned the cylinder in his hands with interest. "And where did the engineer get it?
He hasn't a transmitter also, has he?"
The sergeant shook his head emphatically. He pointed to the knocked-about remnant at the
foot of the bed. "That's the only one in the place. This fellow, Orre, now, he got that book from
one of these pig-pen worlds out here we captured. They had it in a big building by itself and he
had to kill a few of the natives that tried to stop him from taking it."
He looked at it appraisingly. "It makes a good souvenir – for kids."
He paused, then said stealthily, "There's big news floating about, by the way. It's only
scuttlebutt, but even so, it's too good to keep. The general did it again." And he nodded slowly,
gravely.
"That so?" said Devers. "And what did he do?"
"Finished the Enclosure, that's all." The sergeant chuckled with a fatherly pride. "Isn't he the
corker, though? Didn't he work it fine? One of the fellows who's strong on fancy talk, says it
went as smooth and even as the music of the spheres, whatever they are."
"The big offensive starts now?" asked Barr, mildly.
"Hope so," was the boisterous response. "I want to get back on my ship now that my arm is in
one piece again. I'm tired of sitting on my scupper out here."
"So am I," muttered Devers, suddenly and savagely. There was a bit of underlip caught in his
teeth, and he worried it.
The sergeant looked at him doubtfully, and said, "I'd better go now. The captain's round is due
and I'd just as soon he didn't catch me in here."
He paused at the door. "By the way, sir," he said with sudden, awkward shyness to the trader,
"I heard from my wife. She says that little freezer you gave me to send her works fine. It doesn't
cost her anything, and she just about keeps a month's supply of food froze up complete. I
appreciate it."
"It's all right. Forget it."
The great door moved noiselessly shut behind the grinning sergeant.
Ducem Barr got out of his chair. "Well, he gives us a fair return for the freezer. Let's take a look
at this new book. Ahh, the title is gone."
He unrolled a yard or so of the film and looked through at the light. Then he murmured, "Well,
skewer me through the scupper, as the sergeant says. This is 'The Garden of Summa,'
Devers."
"That so?" said the trader, without interest. He shoved aside what was left of his dinner. "Sit
down, Barr. Listening to this old-time literature isn't doing me any good. You heard what the
sergeant said?"
"Yes, I did. What of it?"
"The offensive will start. And we sit here!"
"Where do you want to sit?"
"You know what I mean. There's no use just waiting."
"Isn't there?" Barr was carefully removing the old film from the transmitter and installing the
new. "You told me a good deal of Foundation history in the last month, and it seems that the
great leaders of past crises did precious little more than sit – and wait."
"Ah, Barr, but they knew where they were going."
"Did they? I suppose they said they did when it was over, and for all I know maybe they did. But
there's no proof that things would not have worked out as well or better if they had not known
where they were going. The deeper economic and sociological forces aren't directed by
individual men."
Devers sneered. "No way of telling that things wouldn't have worked out worse, either. You're
arguing tail-end backwards." His eyes were brooding. "You know, suppose I blasted him?"
"Whom? Riose?"
"Yes."
Barr sighed. His aging eyes were troubled with a reflection of the long past. "Assassination isn't
the way out, Devers. I once tried it, under provocation, when I was twenty – but it solved
nothing. I removed a villain from Siwenna, but not the Imperial yoke; and it was the Imperial
yoke and not the villain that mattered."
"But Riose is not just a villain, doc. He's the whole blamed army. It would fall apart without him.
They hang on him like babies. The sergeant out there slobbers every time he mentions him."
"Even so. There are other armies and other leaders. You must go deeper. There is this Brodrig,
for instance – no one more than he has the ear of the Emperor. He could demand hundreds of
ships where Riose must struggle with ten. I know him by reputation."
"That so? What about him?" The trader's eyes lost in frustration what they gained in sharp
interest.
"You want a pocket outline? He's a low-born rascal who has by unfailing flattery tickled the
whims of the Emperor. He's well-hated by the court aristocracy, vermin themselves, because
he can lay claim to neither family nor humility. He is the Emperor's adviser in all things, and the
Emperor's too in the worst things. He is faithless by choice but loyal by necessity. There is not a
man in the Empire as subtle in villainy or as crude in his pleasures. And they say there is no
way to the Emperor's favor but through him; and no way to his, but through infamy."
"Wow!" Devers pulled thoughtfully at his neatly trimmed beard. "And he's the old boy the
Emperor sent out here to keep an eye on Riose. Do you know I have an idea?"
"I do now."
"Suppose this Brodrig takes a dislike to our young Army's Delight?"
"He probably has already. He's not noted for a capacity for liking."
"Suppose it gets really bad. The Emperor might hear about it, and Riose might be in trouble."
"Uh-huh. Quite likely. But how do you propose to get that to happen?"
"I don't know. I suppose he could be bribed?"
The patrician laughed gently. "Yes, in a way, but not in the manner you bribed the sergeant –
not with a pocket freezer. And even if you reach his scale, it wouldn't be worth it. There's
probably no one so easily bribed, but he lacks even the fundamental honesty of honorable
corruption. He doesn't stay bribed; not for any sum. Think of something else."
Devers swung a leg over his knee and his toe nodded quickly and restlessly. "It's the first hint,
though–"
He stopped; the door signal was flashing once again, and the sergeant was on the threshold
once more. He was excited, and his broad face was red and unsmiling.
"Sir," he began, in an agitated attempt at deference, "I am very thankful for the freezer, and you
have always spoken to me very fine, although I am only the son of a farmer and you are great
lords."
His Pleiades accent had grown thick, almost too much so for easy comprehension; and with
excitement, his lumpish peasant derivation wiped out completely the soldierly bearing so long
and so painfully cultivated.
Barr said softly, "What is it, sergeant?"
"Lord Brodrig is coming to see you. Tomorrow! I know, because the captain told me to have my
men ready for dress review tomorrow for ... for him. I thought – I might warn you."
Barr said, "Thank you, sergeant, we appreciate that. But it's all right, man; no need for–"
But the look on Sergeant Luk's face was now unmistakably one of fear. He spoke in a rough
whisper, "You don't hear the stories the men tell about him. He has sold himself to the space
fiend. No, don't laugh. There are most terrible tales told about him. They say he has men with
blast-guns who follow him everywhere, and when he wants pleasure, he just tells them to blast
down anyone they meet. And they do – and he laughs. They say even the Emperor is in terror
of him, and that he forces the Emperor to raise taxes and won't let him listen to the complaints
of the people.
"And he hates the general, that's what they say. They say he would like to kill the general,
because the general is so great and wise. But he can't because our general is a match for
anyone and he knows Lord Brodrig is a bad 'un."
The sergeant blinked; smiled in a sudden incongruous shyness at his own outburst; and
backed toward the door. He nodded his head, jerkily. "You mind my words. Watch him."
He ducked out.
And Devers looked up, hard-eyed. "This breaks things our way, doesn't it, doc?"
"It depends," said Barr, dryly, "on Brodrig, doesn't it?"
But Devers was thinking, not listening.
He was thinking hard.
Lord Brodrig ducked his head as he stepped into the cramped living quarters of the trading
ship, and his two armed guards followed quickly, with bared guns and the professionally hard
scowls of the hired bravos.
The Privy Secretary had little of the look of the lost soul about him just then. If the space fiend
had bought him, he had left no visible mark of possession. Rather might Brodrig have been
considered a breath of court-fashion come to enliven the hard, bare ugliness of an army base.
The stiff, tight lines of his sheened and immaculate costume gave him the illusion of height,
from the very top of which his cold, emotionless eyes stared down the declivity of a long nose
at the trader. The mother-of-pearl ruches at his wrists fluttered filmily as he brought his ivory
stick to the ground before him and leaned upon it daintily.
"No," he said, with a little gesture, "you remain here. Forget your toys; I am not interested in
them."
He drew forth a chair, dusted it carefully with the iridescent square of fabric attached to the top
of his white stick, and seated himself. Devers glanced towards the mate to the chair, but
Brodrig said lazily, "You will stand in the presence of a Peer of the Realm."
He smiled.
Devers shrugged. "If you're not interested in my stock in trade, what am I here for?"
The Privy Secretary waited coldly, and Devers added a slow, "Sir."
"For privacy," said the secretary. "Now is it likely that I would come two hundred parsecs
through space to inspect trinkets? It's you I want to see." He extracted a small pink tablet from
an engraved box and placed it delicately between his teeth. He sucked it slowly and
appreciatively.
"For instance," he said, "who are you? Are you really a citizen of this barbarian world that is
creating all this fury of military frenzy?"
Devers nodded gravely.
"And you were really captured by him after the beginning of this squabble he calls a war. I am
referring to our young general."
Devers nodded again.
"So! Very well, my worthy Outlander. I see your fluency of speech is at a minimum. I shall
smooth the way for you. It seems that our general here is fighting an apparently meaningless
war with frightful transports of energy – and this over a forsaken fleabite of a world at the end of
nowhere, which to a logical man would not seem worth a single blast of a single gun. Yet the
general is not illogical. On the contrary, I would say he was extremely intelligent. Do you follow
me?"
"Can't say I do, sir."
The secretary inspected his fingernails and said, "Listen further, then. The general would not
waste his men and ships on a sterile feat of glory. I know he talks of glory and of Imperial
honor, but it is quite obvious that the affectation of being one of the insufferable old demigods
of the Heroic Age won't wash. There is something more than glory hereand he does take queer,
unnecessary care of you. Now if you were my prisoner and told me as little of use as you have
our general, I would slit open your abdomen and strangle you with your own intestines."
Devers remained wooden. His eyes moved slightly, first to one of the secretary's bully-boys,
and then to the other. They were ready; eagerly ready.
The secretary smiled. "Well, now, you're a silent devil. According to the general, even a Psychic
Probe made no impression, and that was a mistake on his part, by the way, for it convinced me
that our young military whizz-bang was lying." He seemed in high humor.
"My honest tradesman," he said, "I have a Psychic Probe of my own, one that ought to suit you
peculiarly well. You see this–"
And between thumb and forefinger, held negligently, were intricately designed, pink-and-yellow
rectangles which were most definitely obvious in identity.
Devers said so. "It looks like cash," he said.
"Cash it is – and the best cash of the Empire, for it is backed by my estates, which are more
extensive than the Emperor's own. A hundred thousand credits. All here! Between two fingers!
Yours!"
"For what, sir? I am a good trader, but all trades go in both directions."
"For what? For the truth! What is the general after? Why is he fighting this war?"
Lathan Devers sighed, and smoothed his beard thoughtfully.
"What he's after?" His eyes were following the motions of the secretary's hands as he counted
the money slowly, bill by bill. "In a word, the Empire."
"Hmp. How ordinary! It always comes to that in the end. But how? What is the road that leads
from the Galaxy's edge to the peak of Empire so broadly and invitingly?"
"The Foundation," said Devers, bitterly, "has secrets. They have books, old books – so old that
the language they are in is only known to a few of the top men. But the secrets are shrouded in
ritual and religion, and none may use them. I tried and now I am here – and there is a death
sentence waiting for me, there."
"I see. And these old secrets? Come, for one hundred thousand I deserve the intimate details."
"The transmutation of elements," said Devers, shortly.
The secretary's eyes narrowed and lost some of their detachment. "I have been told that
practical transmutation is impossible by the laws of nucleics."
"So it is, if nuclear forces are used. But the ancients were smart boys. There are sources of
power greater than the nuclei and more fundamental. If the Foundation used those sources as I
suggested–"
Devers felt a soft, creeping sensation in his stomach. The bait was dangling; the fish was
nosing it.
The secretary said suddenly, "Continue. The general, I am sure, is aware of a this. But what
does he intend doing once he finishes this opera-bouffe affair?"
Devers kept his voice rock-steady. "With transmutation he controls the economy of the whole
set-up of your Empire. Mineral holdings won't be worth a sneeze when Riose can make
tungsten out of aluminum and iridium out of iron. An entire production system based on the
scarcity of certain elements and the abundance of others is thrown completely out of whack.
There'll be the greatest disjointment the Empire has ever seen, and only Riose will be able to
stop it. And there is the question of this new power I mentioned, the use of which won't give
Riose religious heebies.
"There's nothing that can stop him now. He's got the Foundation by the back of the neck, and
once he's finished with it, he'll be Emperor in two years."
"So." Brodrig laughed lightly. "Iridium out of iron, that's what you said, isn't it? Come, I'll tell you
a state secret. Do you know that the Foundation has already been in communication with the
general?"
Devers' back stiffened.
"You look surprised. Why not? It seems logical now. They offered him a hundred tons of iridium
a year to make peace. A hundred tons of iron converted to iridium in violation of their religious
principles to save their necks. Fair enough, but no wonder our rigidly incorruptible general
refused – when he can have the iridium and the Empire as well. And poor Cleon called him his
one honest general. My bewhiskered merchant, you have earned your money."
He tossed it, and Devers scrambled after the flying bills.
Lord Brodrig stopped at the door and turned. "One reminder, trader. My playmates with the
guns here have neither middle ears, tongues, education, nor intelligence. They can neither
hear, speak, write, nor even make sense to a Psychic Probe. But they are very expert at
interesting executions. I have bought you, man, at one hundred thousand credits. You will be
good and worthy merchandise. Should you forget that you are bought at any time and attempt
to ... say ... repeat our conversation to Riose, you will be executed. But executed my way."
And in that delicate face there were sudden hard lines of eager cruelty that changed the studied
smile into a red-lipped snarl. For one fleeting second, Devers saw that space fiend who had
bought his buyer, look out of his buyer's eyes.
Silently, he preceded the two thrusting blast-guns of Brodrig's "playmates" to his quarters.
And to Ducem Barr's question, he said with brooding satisfaction, "No, that's the queerest part
of it. He bribed me.
Two months of difficult war had left their mark on Bel Riose. There was heavy-handed gravity
about him; and he was short-tempered.
It was with impatience that he addressed the worshiping Sergeant Luk. "Wait outside, soldier,
and conduct these men back to their quarters when I am through. No one is to enter until I call.
No one at all, you understand."
The sergeant saluted himself stiffly out of the room, and Riose with muttered disgust scooped
up the waiting papers on his desk, threw them into the top drawer and slammed it shut.
"Take seats," he said shortly, to the waiting two. "I haven't much time. Strictly speaking, I
shouldn't be here at all, but it is necessary to see you."
He turned to Ducem Barr, whose long fingers were caressing with interest the crystal cube in
which was set the simulacrum of the lined, austere face of His Imperial Majesty, Cleon II.
"In the first place, patrician," said the general, "your Seldon is losing. To be sure, he battles
well, for these men of the Foundation swarm like senseless bees and fight like madmen. Every
planet is defended viciously, and once taken, every planet heaves so with rebellion it is as
much trouble to hold as to conquer. But they are taken, and they are held. Your Seldon is
losing."
"But he has not yet lost," murmured Barr politely.
"The Foundation itself retains less optimism. They offer me millions in order that I may not put
this Seldon to the final test."
"So rumor goes."
"Ah, is rumor preceding me? Does it prate also of the latest?"
"What is the latest?"
"Why, that Lord Brodrig, the darling of the Emperor, is now second in command at his own
request."
Devers spoke for the first time. "At his own request, boss? How come? Or are you growing to
like the fellow?" He chuckled.
Riose said, calmly, "No, can't say I do. It's just that he bought the office at what I considered a
fair and adequate price."
"Such as?"
"Such as a request to the Emperor for reinforcements."
Devers' contemptuous smile broadened. "'He has communicated with the Emperor, huh? And I
take it, boss, you're just waiting for these reinforcements, but they'll come any day. Right?"
"Wrong! They have already come. Five ships of the line; smooth and strong, with a personal
message of congratulations from the Emperor, and more ships on the way. What's wrong,
trader?" he asked, sardonically.
Devers spoke through suddenly frozen lips. "Nothing!"
Riose strode out from behind his desk and faced the trader, hand on the butt of his blast-gun.
"I say, what's wrong, trader? The news would seem to disturb you. Surely, you have no sudden
birth of interest in the Foundation."
"I haven't."
"Yes – there are queer points about you."
"That so, boss?" Devers smiled tightly, and balled the fists in his pockets. "Just you line them
up and I'll knock them down for you."
"Here they are. You were caught easily. You surrendered at first blow with a burnt-out shield.
You're quite ready to desert your world, and that without a price. Interesting, all this, isn't it?"
"I crave to be on the winning side, boss. I'm a sensible man; you called me that yourself."
Riose said with tight throatiness, "Granted! Yet no trader since has been captured. No trade
ship but has had the speed to escape at choice. No trade ship but has had a screen that could
take all the beating a light cruiser could give it, should it choose to fight. And no trader but has
fought to death when occasion warranted. Traders have been traced as the leaders and
instigators of the guerilla warfare on occupied planets and of the flying raids in occupied space.
"Are you the only sensible man then? You neither fight nor flee, but turn traitor without urging.
You are unique, amazingly unique – in fact, suspiciously unique."
Devers said softly, "I take your meaning, but you have nothing on me. I've been here now six
months, and I've been a good boy."
"So you have, and I have repaid you by good treatment. I have left your ship undisturbed and
treated you with every consideration. Yet you fall short. Freely offered information, for instance,
on your gadgets might have been helpful. The atomic principles on which they are built would
seem to be used in some of the Foundation's nastiest weapons. Right?"
"I am only a trader," said Devers, "and not one of these bigwig technicians. I sell the stuff; I
don't make it."
"Well, that will be seen shortly. It is what I came here for. For instance, your ship will be
searched for a personal force-shield. You have never worn one; yet all soldiers of the
Foundation do. It will be significant evidence that there is information you do not choose to give
me. Right?"
There was no answer. He continued, "And there will be more direct evidence. I have brought
with me the Psychic Probe. It failed once before, but contact with the enemy is a liberal
education."
His voice was smoothly threatening and Devers felt the gun thrust hard in his midriff – the
general's gun, hitherto in its holster.
The general said quietly, "You will remove your wristband and any other metal ornament you
wear and give them to me. Slowly! Atomic fields can be distorted, you see, and Psychic Probes
might probe only into static. That's right.. I'll take it."
The receiver on the general's desk was glowing and a message capsule clicked into the slot,
near which Barr stood and still held the trimensional Imperial bust.
Riose stepped behind his desk, with his blast-gun held ready. He said to Barr, "You too,
patrician. Your wristband condemns you. You have been helpful earlier, however, and I am not
vindictive, but I shall judge the fate of your behostaged family by the results of the Psychic
Probe."
And as Riose leaned over to take out the message capsule, Barr lifted the crystal-enveloped
bust of Cleon and quietly and methodically brought it down upon the general's head.
It happened too suddenly for Devers to grasp. It was as if a sudden demon had grown into the
old man.
"Out!" said Barr, in a tooth-clenched whisper. "Quickly!" He seized Riose's dropped blaster and
buried it in his blouse.
Sergeant Luk turned as they emerged from the narrowest possible crack of the door.
Barr said easily, "Lead on, sergeant!"
Devers closed the door behind him.
Sergeant Luk led in silence to their quarters, and then, with the briefest pause, continued
onward, for there was the nudge of a blast-gun muzzle in his ribs, and a hard voice in his ears
which said, "To the trade ship."
Devers stepped forward to open the air lock, and Barr said, "Stand where you are, Luk. You've
been a decent man, and we're not going to kill you."
But the sergeant recognized the monogram on the gun. He cried in choked fury, "You've killed
the general."
With a wild, incoherent yell, he charged blindly upon the blasting fury of the gun and collapsed
in blasted ruin.
The trade ship was rising above the dead planet before the signal lights began their eerie blink
and against the creamy cobweb of the great Lens in the sky which was the Galaxy, other black
forms rose.
Devers said grimly, "Hold tight, Barr – and let's see if they've got a ship that can match my
speed."
He knew they hadn't!
And once in open space, the trader's voice seemed lost and dead as he said, "The line I fed
Brodrig was a little too good. It seems as if he's thrown in with the general."
Swiftly they raced into the depths of the star-mass that was the Galaxy.
8. TO TRANTOR
Devers bent over the little dead globe, watching for a tiny sign of life. The directional control
was slowly and thoroughly sieving space with its jabbing tight sheaf of signals.
Barr watched patiently from his seat on the low cot in the comer, He asked, "No more signs of
them?"
"The Empire boys? No." The trader growled the words with evident impatience. "We lost the
scuppers long ago. Space! With the blind jumps we took through hyperspace, it's lucky we
didn't land up in a sun's belly. They couldn't have followed us even if they outranged us, which
they didn't."
He sat back and loosened his collar with a jerk. "I don't know what those Empire boys have
done here. I think some of the gaps are out of alignment."
"I take it, then, you're trying to get to the Foundation."
"I'm calling the Association – or trying to."
"The Association? Who are they?"
"Association of Independent Traders. Never heard of it, huh? Well, you're not alone. We haven't
made our splash yet!"
For a while there was a silence that centered about the unresponsive Reception Indicator, and
Barr said, "Are you within range?"
"I don't know. I haven't but a small notion where we are, going by dead reckoning. That's why I
have to use directional control. It could take years, you know."
"Might it?"
Barr pointed; and Devers jumped and adjusted his earphones. Within the little murky sphere
there was a tiny glowing whiteness.
For half an hour, Devers nursed the fragile, groping thread of communication that reached
through hyperspace to connect two points that laggard light would take five hundred years to
bind together.
Then he sat back, hopelessly. He looked up, and shoved the earphones back.
"Let's eat, doc. There's a needle-shower you can use if you want to, but go easy on the hot
water."
He squatted before one of the cabinets that lined one wall and felt through the contents. "You're
not a vegetarian, I hope?"
Barr said, "I'm omnivorous. But what about the Association. Have you lost them?"
"Looks so. It was extreme range, a little too extreme. Doesn't matter, though. I got all that
counted."
He straightened, and placed the two metal containers upon the table. "Just give it five minutes,
doc, then slit it open by pushing the contact. It'll be plate, food, and fork – sort of handy for
when you're in a hurry, if you're not interested in such incidentals as napkins. I suppose you
want to know what I got out of the Association."
"If it isn't a secret."
Devers shook his head. "Not to you. What Riose said was true."
"About the offer of tribute?"
"Uh-huh. They offered it, and had it refused. Things are bad. There's fighting in the outer suns
of Loris."
"Loris is close to the Foundation?"
"Huh? Oh, you wouldn't know. It's one of the original Four Kingdoms. You might call it part of
the inner line of defense. That's not the worst. They've been fighting large ships previously
never encountered. Which means Riose wasn't giving us the works. He has received more
ships. Brodrig has switched sides, and I have messed things up."
His eyes were bleak as he joined the food-container contact-points and watched it fall open
neatly. The stewlike dish steamed its aroma through the room. Ducem Barr was already eating.
"So much," said Barr, "for improvisations, then. We can do nothing here; we can not cut
through the Imperial lines to return to the Foundation; we can do nothing but that which is most
sensible – to wait patiently. However, if Riose has reached the inner line I trust the wait will not
be too long."
And Devers put down his fork. "Wait, is it?" he snarled, glowering. "That's all right for you.
You've got nothing at stake."
"Haven't I?" Barr smiled thinly.
"No. In fact, I'll tell you." Devers' irritation skimmed the surface. "I'm tired of looking at this whole
business as if it were an interesting something-or-other on a microscope slide. I've got friends
somewhere out there, dying; and a whole world out there, my home, dying also. You're an
outsider. You don't know."
"I have seen friends die." The old man's hands were limp in his lap and his eyes were closed.
"Are you married?"
Devers said, "Traders don't marry."
"Well, I have two sons and a nephew. They have been warned, but – for reasons – they could
take no action. Our escape means their death. My daughter and my two grandchildren have, I
hope, left the planet safety before this, but even excluding them, I have already risked and lost
more than you."
Devers was morosely savage. "I know. But that was a matter of choice. You might have played
ball with Riose. I never asked you to–"
Barr shook his head. "It was not a matter of choice, Devers. Make your conscience free, I didn't
risk my sons for you. I co-operated with Riose as long as I dared. But there was the Psychic
Probe."
The Siwennian patrician opened his eyes and they were sharp with pain. "Riose came to me
once; it was over a year ago. He spoke of a cult centering about the magicians, but missed the
truth. It is not quite a cult. You see, it is forty years now that Siwenna has been gripped in the
same unbearable vise that threatens your world. Five revolts have been ground out. Then I
discovered the ancient records of Hari Seldon – and now this 'cult' waits.
"It waits for the coming of the 'magicians' and for that day it is ready. My sons are leaders of
those who wait. It is that secret which is in my mind and which the Probe must never touch.
And so they must die as hostages; for the alternative is their death as rebels and half of
Siwenna with them. You see, I had no choice! And I am no outsider."
Devers' eyes fell, and Barr continued softly, "It is on a Foundation victory that Siwenna's hopes
depend. It is for a Foundation victory that my sons are sacrificed. And Hari Seldon does not
pre-calculate the inevitable salvation of Siwenna as he does that of the Foundation. I have no
certainty for my people – only hope."
"But you are still satisfied to wait. Even with the Imperial Navy at Loris."
"I would wait, in perfect confidence," said Barr, simply, "if they had landed on the planet,
Terminus, itself."
The trader frowned hopelessly. "I don't know. It can't really work like that; not just like magic.
Psychohistory or not, they're terribly strong, and we're weak. What can Setdon do about it?"
"There's nothing to do. It's all already done. It's proceeding now. Because you don't hear the
wheels turning and the gongs beating doesn't mean it's any the less certain."
"Maybe; but I wish you had cracked Riose's skull for keeps. He's more the enemy than all his
army."
"Cracked his skull? With Brodrig his second in command?" Barr's face sharpened with hate. "All
Siwenna would have been my hostage. Brodrig has proven his worth long since. There exists a
world which five years ago lost one male in every ten – and simply for failure to meet
outstanding taxes. This same Brodrig was the tax-collector. No, Riose may live. His
punishments are mercy in comparison."
"But six months, six months, in the enemy Base, with nothing to show for it." Devers' strong
hands clasped each other tautly, so that his knuckles cracked. "Nothing to show for it!"
"Well, now, wait. You remind me–" Barr fumbled in his pouch. "You might want to count this."
And he tossed the small sphere of metal on the table.
Devers snatched it. "What is it?"
"The message capsule. The one that Riose received just before I jacked him. Does that count
as something?"
"I don't know. Depends on what's in it!" Devers sat down and turned it over carefully in his
hand.
When Barr stepped from his cold shower and, gratefully, into the mild warm current of the air
dryer, he found Devers silent and absorbed at the workbench.
The Siwennian slapped his body with a sharp rhythm and spoke above the punctuating sounds.
"What are you doing?"
Devers looked up. Droplets of perspiration glittered in his beard. "I'm going to open this
capsule."
"Can you open it without Riose's personal characteristic?" There was mild surprise in the
Siwennian's voice.
"If I can't, I'll resign from the Association and never skipper a ship for what's left of my life. I've
got a three-way electronic analysis of the interior now, and I've got little jiggers that the Empire
never heard of, especially made for jimmying capsules. I've been a burglar before this, y'know.
A trader has to be something of everything."
He bent low over the little sphere, and a small flat instrument probed delicately and sparked
redly at each fleeting contact.
He said, "This capsule is a crude job, anyway. These Imperial boys are no shakes at this small
work. I can see that. Ever see a Foundation capsule? It's half the size and impervious to
electronic analysis in the first place."
And then he was rigid, the shoulder muscles beneath his tunic tautening visibly. His tiny probe
pressed slowly–
It was noiseless when it came, but Devers; relaxed and sighed. In his hand was the shining
sphere with its message unrolled like a parchment tongue.
"It's from Brodrig," he said. Then, with contempt, "The message medium is permanent. In a
Foundation capsule, the message would be oxidized to gas within the minute."
But Ducem Barr waved him silent. He read the message quickly.
FROM: AMMEL BRODRIG, ENVOY EXTRAORDINARY OF HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY, PRIVY
SECRETARY OF THE COUNCIL, AND PEER OF THE REALM.
TO: BEL RIOSE, MILITARY GOVERNOR OF SIWENNA. GENERAL OF THE IMPERIAL
FORCES, AND PEER OF THE REALM. I GREET YOU.
PLANET #1120 NO LONGER RESISTS. THE PLANS OF OFFENSE AS OUTLINED
CONTINUE SMOOTHLY. THE ENEMY WEAKENS VISIBLY AND THE ULTIMATE ENDS IN
VIEW WILL SURELY BE GAINED.
Barr raised his head from the almost microscopic print and cried bitterly, "The fool! The
forsaken blasted fop! That a message?"
"Huh?" said Devers. He was vaguely disappointed.
"It says nothing," ground out Barr. "Our lick-spittle courtier is playing at general now. With Riose
away, he is the field commander and must sooth his paltry spirit by spewing out his pompous
reports concerning military affairs he has nothing to do with. 'So-and-so planet no longer
resists.' 'The offensive moves on.' 'The enemy weakens.' The vacuum-headed peacock."
"Well, now, wait a minute. Hold on–"
"Throw it away." The old man turned away in mortification. "The Galaxy knows I never expected
it to be world-shakingly important, but in wartime it is reasonable to assume that even the most
routine order left undelivered might hamper military movements and lead to complications later.
It's why I snatched it. But this! Better to have left it. It would have wasted a minute of Riose's
time that will now be put to more constructive use."
But Devers had arisen. "Will you hold on and stop throwing your weight around? For Seldon's
sake–"
He held out the sliver of message before Barr's nose, "Now read that again. What does he
mean by 'ultimate ends in view'?"
"The conquest of the Foundation. Well?"
"Yes? And maybe he means the conquest of the Empire. You know he believes that to be the
ultimate end."
"And if he does?"
"If he does!" Devers' one-sided smile was lost in his beard. "Why, watch then, and I'll show
you."
With one finger the lavishly monogrammed sheet of message-parchment was thrust back into
its slot. With a soft twang, it disappeared and the globe was a smooth, unbroken whole again.
Somewhere inside was the tiny oiled whir of the controls as they lost their setting by random
movements.
"Now there is no known way of opening this capsule without knowledge of Riose's personal
characteristic, is there?"
"To the Empire, no," said Barr.
"Then the evidence it contains is unknown to us and absolutely authentic."
"To the Empire, yes," said Barr.
"And the Emperor can open it, can't he? Personal Characteristics of Government officials must
be on file. We keep records of our officials at the Foundation."
"At the Imperial capital as well," agreed Barr.
"Then when you, a Siwennian patrician and Peer of the Realm, tell this Cleon, this Emperor,
that his favorite tame-parrot and his shiniest general are getting together to knock him over,
and hand him the capsule as evidence, what will he think Brodrig's 'ultimate ends' are?"
Barr sat down weakly. "Wait, I don't follow you." He stroked one thin cheek, and said, "You're
not really serious, are you?"
"I am." Devers was angrily excited. "Listen, nine out of the last ten Emperors got their throats
cut, or their gizzards blasted out by one or another of their generals with bigtime notions in their
heads. You told me that yourself more than once. Old man Emperor would believe us so fast it
would make Riose's head swim."
Barr muttered feebly, "He is serious, For the Galaxy's sake, man, you can't beat a Seldon crisis
by a far-fetched, impractical, storybook scheme like that. Suppose you had never got hold of
the capsule. Suppose Brodrig hadn't used the word 'ultimate.' Seldon doesn't depend on wild
luck."
"If wild luck comes our way, there's no law says Seldon can't take advantage of it."
"Certainly. But ... but," Barr stopped, then spoke calmly but with visible restraint. "Look, in the
first place, how will you get to the planet Trantor? You don't know its location in space, and I
certainly don't remember the co-ordinates, to say nothing of the ephemerae. You don't even
know your own position in space."
"You can't get lost in space," grinned Devers. He was at the controls already. "Down we go to
the nearest planet, and back we come with complete bearings and the best navigation charts
Brodrig's hundred thousand smackers can buy."
"And a blaster in our belly. Our descriptions are probably in every planet in this quarter of the
Empire."
"Doc," said Devers, patiently, "don't be a hick tom the sticks. Riose said my ship surrendered
too easily and, brother, he wasn't kidding. This ship has enough fire-power and enough juice in
its shield to hold off anything we're Rely to meet this deep inside the frontier. And we have
personal shields, too. The Empire boys never found them, you know, but they weren't meant to
be found."
"All fight," said Barr, "all right. Suppose yourself on Trantor. How do you see the Emperor then?
You think he keeps office hours?"
"Suppose we worry about that on Trantor," said Devers.
And Barr muttered helplessly, "All right again. I've wanted to see Trantor before I die for half a
century now. Have your way."
The hypernuclear motor was cut in. The lights flickered and there was the slight internal wrench
that marked the shift into hyperspace.
9. ON TRANTOR
The stars were as thick as weeds in an unkempt field, and for the first time, Lathan Devers
found the figures to the right of the decimal point of prime importance in calculating the cuts
through the hyper-regions. There was a claustrophobic sensation about the necessity for leaps
of not more than a light-year. There was a frightening harshness about a sky which glittered
unbrokenly in every direction. It was being lost in a sea of radiation.
And in the center of an open cluster of ten thousand stars, whose light tore to shreds the feebly
encircling darkness, there circled the huge Imperial planet, Trantor.
But it was more than a planet; it was the living pulse beat of an Empire of twenty million stellar
systems. It had only one, function, administration; one purpose, government; and one
manufactured product, law.
The entire world was one functional distortion. There was no living object on its surface hut
man, his pets, and his parasites. No blade of grass or fragment of uncovered soil could be
found outside the hundred square miles of the Imperial Palace. No fresh water outside the
Palace grounds existed but in the vast underground cisterns that held the water supply of a
world.
The lustrous, indestructible, incorruptible metal that was the unbroken surface of the planet was
the foundation of the huge, metal structures that mazed the planet. They were structures
connected by causeways; laced by corridors; cubbyholed by offices; basemented by the huge
retail centers that covered square miles; penthoused by the glittering amusement world that
sparkled into life each night.
One could walk around the world of Trantor and never leave that one conglomerate building,
nor see the city.
A fleet of ships greater in number than all the war fleets the Empire had ever supported landed
their cargoes on Trantor each day to feed the forty billions of humans who gave nothing in
exchange but the fulfillment of the necessity of untangling the myriads of threads that spiraled
into the central administration of the most complex government Humanity had ever known.
Twenty agricultural worlds were the granary of Trantor. A universe was its servant.
Tightly held by the huge metal arms on either side, the trade ship was gently lowered down the
huge ramp that led to the hangar. Already Devers had fumed his way through the manifold
complications of a world conceived in paper work and dedicated to the principle of the
form-in-quadruplicate.
There had been the preliminary halt in space, where the first of what had grown into a hundred
questionnaires had been filled out. There were the hundred cross-examinations, the routine
administration of a simple Probe, the photographing of the ship, the Characteristic-Analysis of
the two men, and the subsequent recording of the same, the search for contraband, the
payment of the entry tax – and finally the question of the identity cards and visitor's visa.
Ducem Barr was a Siwennian and subject of the Emperor, but Lathan Devers was an unknown
without the requisite documents. The official in charge at the moment was devastated with
sorrow, but Devers could not enter. In fact, he would have to be held for official investigation.
From somewhere a hundred credits in crisp, new bills backed by the estates of Lord Brodrig
made their appearance, and changed bands quietly. The official hemmed importantly and the
devastation of his sorrow was assuaged. A new form made its appearance from the appropriate
pigeonhole. It was filled out rapidly and efficiently, with the Devers characteristic thereto
formally and properly attached.
The two men, trader and patrician, entered Siwenna.
In the hangar, the trade ship was another vessel to be cached, photographed, recorded,
contents noted, identity cards of passengers facsimiled, and for which a suitable fee was paid,
recorded, and receipted.
And then Devers was on a huge terrace under the bright white sun, along which women
chattered, children shrieked, and men sipped drinks languidly and listened to the huge
televisors blaring out the news of the Empire.
Barr paid a requisite number of iridium coins and appropriated the uppermost member of a pile
of newspapers. It was the Trantor Imperial News, official organ of the government. In the back
of the news room, there was the soft clicking noise of additional editions being printed in
long-distance sympathy with the busy machines at the Imperial News offices ten thousand
miles away by corridor – six thousand by air-machine – just as ten million sets of copies were
being likewise printed at that moment in ten million other news rooms all over the planet.
Barr glanced at the headlines and said softly, "What shall we do first?"
Devers tried to shake himself out of his depression. He was in a universe far removed from his
own, on a world that weighted him down with its intricacy, among people whose doings were
incomprehensible and whose language was nearly so. The gleaming metallic towers that
surrounded him and continued onwards in never-ending multiplicity to beyond the horizon
oppressed him; the whole busy, unheeding life of a world-metropolis cast him into the horrible
gloom of isolation and pygmyish unimportance.
He said, "I better leave it to you, doc."
Barr was calm, low-voice. "I tried to tell you, but it's hard to believe without seeing for yourself, I
know that. Do you know how many people want to see the Emperor every day? About one
million. Do you know how many he sees? About ten. We'll have to work through the civil
service, and that makes it harder. But we can't afford the aristocracy."
"We have almost one hundred thousand."
"A single Peer of the Realm would cost us that, and it would take at least three or four to form
an adequate bridge to the Emperor. It may take fifty chief commissioners and senior
supervisors to do the same, but they would cost us only a hundred apiece perhaps. I'll do the
talking. In the first place, they wouldn't understand your accent, and in the second, you don't
know the etiquette of Imperial bribery. It's an art, I assure you. Ah!"
The third page of the Imperial News had what he wanted and he passed the paper to Devers.
Devers read slowly. The vocabulary was strange, but he understood. He looked up, and his
eyes were dark with concern. He slapped the news sheet angrily with the back of his hand.
"You think this can be trusted?"
"Within limits," replied Barr, calmly. "It's highly improbable that the Foundation fleet was wiped
out. They've probably reported that several times already, if they've gone by the usual
war-reporting technique of a world capital far from the actual scene of fighting. What it means,
though, is that Riose has won another battle, which would be none-too-unexpected. It says he's
captured Loris. Is that the capital planet of the Kingdom of Loris?"
"Yes," brooded Devers, "or of what used to be the Kingdom of Loris. And it's not twenty parsecs
from the Foundation. Doc, we've got to work fast."
Barr shrugged, "You can't go fast on Trantor. If you try, you'll end up at the point of an
atom-blaster, most likely."
"How long will it take?"
"A month, if we're lucky. A month, and our hundred thousand credits – if even that will suffice.
And that is providing the Emperor does not take it into his head in the meantime to travel to the
Summer Planets, where he sees no petitioners at all."
"But the Foundation–"
"–Will take care of itself, as heretofore. Come, there's the question of dinner. I'm hungry. And
afterwards, the evening is ours and we may as well use it. We shall never see Trantor or any
world like it again, you know."
The Home Commissioner of the Outer Provinces spread his pudgy hands helplessly and
peered at the petitioners with owlish nearsightedness. "But the Emperor is indisposed,
gentlemen. It is really useless to take the matter to my superior. His Imperial Majesty has seen
no one in a week."
"He will see us," said Barr, with an affectation of confidence. "It is but a question of seeing a
member of the staff of the Privy Secretary."
"Impossible," said the commissioner emphatically. "It would be the worth of my job to attempt
that. Now if you could but be more explicit concerning the nature of your business. I'm willing to
help you, understand, but naturally I want something less vague, something I can present to my
superior as reason for taking the matter further."
"If my business were such that it could be told to any but the highest," suggested Barr,
smoothly, "it would scarcely be important enough to rate audience with His Imperial Majesty. I
propose that you take a chance. I might remind you that if His Imperial Majesty attaches the
importance to our business which we guarantee that he will, you will stand certain to receive
the honors you will deserve for helping us now."
"Yes, but–" and the commissioner shrugged, wordlessly.
"It's a chance," agreed Barr. "Naturally, a risk should have its compensation. It is a rather great
favor to ask you, but we have already been greatly obliged with your kindness in offering us this
opportunity to explain our problem. But if you would allow us to express our gratitude just
slightly by–"
Devers scowled. He had heard this speech with its slight variations twenty times in the past
month. It ended, as always, in a quick shift of the half-hidden bills. But the epilogue differed
here. Usually the bills vanished immediately; here they remained in plain view, while slowly the
commissioner counted them, inspecting them front and back as he did so.
There was a subtle change in his voice. "Backed by the Privy Secretary, hey? Good money!"
"To get back to the subject–" urged Barr.
"No, but wait," interrupted the commissioner, "let us go back by easy stages. I really do wish to
know what your business can be. This money, it is fresh and new, and you must have a good
deal, for it strikes me that you have seen other officials before me. Come, now, what about it?"
Barr said, "I don't see what you are driving at."
"Why, see here, it might be proven that you are upon the planet illegally, since the Identification
and Entry Cards of your silent friend are certainly inadequate. He is not a subject of the
Emperor."
"I deny that."
"It doesn't matter that you do," said the commissioner, with sudden bluntness. "The official who
signed his Cards for the sum of a hundred credits has confessed – under pressure – and we
know more of you than you think."
"If you are hinting, sir, that the sum we have asked you to accept is inadequate in view of the
risks–"
The commissioner smiled. "On the contrary, it is more than adequate." He tossed the bills
aside. "To return to what I was saying, it is the Emperor himself who has become interested in
your case. Is it not true, sirs, that you have recently been guests of General Riose? Is it not true
that you have escaped from the midst of his army with, to put it mildly, astonishing ease? Is it
not true that you possess a small fortune in bills backed by Lord Brodrig's estates? In short, is it
not true that you are a pair of spies and assassins sent here to – Well, you shall tell us yourself
who paid you and for what!"
"Do you know," said Barr, with silky anger, "I deny the right of a petty commissioner to accuse
us of crimes. We will leave."
"You will not leave." The commissioner arose, and his eyes no longer seemed near-sighted.
"You need answer no question now; that will be reserved for a later – and more forceful – time.
Nor am I a commissioner; I am a Lieutenant of the Imperial Police. You are under arrest."
There was a glitteringly efficient blast-gun in his fist as he smiled. "There are greater men than
you under arrest this day. It is a hornet's nest we are cleaning up."
Devers snarled and reached slowly for his own gun. The lieutenant of police smiled more
broadly and squeezed the contacts. The blasting line of force struck Devers' chest in an
accurate blaze of destruction – that bounced harmlessly off his personal shield in sparkling
spicules of light.
Devers shot in turn, and the lieutenant's head fell from off an upper torso that had disappeared.
It was still smiling as it lay in the jag of sunshine which entered through the new-made hole in
the wall.
It was through the back entrance that they left.
Devers said huskily, "Quickly to the ship. They'll have the alarm out in no time." He cursed in a
ferocious whisper. "It's another plan that's backfired. I could swear the space fiend himself is
against me."
It was in the open that they became aware of the jabbering crowds that surrounded the huge
televisors. They had no time to wait; the disconnected roaring words that reached them, they
disregarded. But Barr snatched a copy of the Imperial News before diving into the huge barn of
the hangar, where the ship lifted hastily through a giant cavity burnt fiercely into the roof.
"Can you get away from them?" asked Barr.
Ten ships of the traffic-police wildly followed the runaway craft that had burst out of the lawful,
radio-beamed Path of Leaving, and then broken every speed law in creation. Further behind
still, sleek vessels of the Secret Service were lifting in pursuit of a carefully described ship
manned by two thoroughly identified murderers.
"Watch me," said Devers, and savagely shifted into hyperspace two thousand miles above the
surface of Trantor. The shift, so near a planetary mass, meant unconsciousness for Barr and a
fearful haze of pain for Devers, but light-years further, space above them was clear.
Devers' somber pride in his ship burst to the surface. He said, "There's not an Imperial ship that
could follow me anywhere."
And then, bitterly, "But there is nowhere left to run to for us, and we can't fight their weight.
What's there to do? What can anyone do?"
Barr moved feebly on his cot. The effect of the hypershift had not yet worn off, and each of his
muscles ached. He said, "No one has to do anything. It's all over. Here!"
He passed the copy of the Imperial News that he still clutched, and the headlines were enough
for the trader.
"Recalled and arrested – Riose and Brodrig," Devers muttered. He stared blankly at Barr.
"Why?"
"The story doesn't say, but what does it matter? The war with the Foundation is over, and at
this moment, Siwenna is revolting. Read the story and see." His voice was drifting off. "We'll
stop in some of the provinces and find out the later details. If you don't mind, I'll go to sleep
now."
And he did.
In grasshopper jumps of increasing magnitude, the trade ship was spanning the Galaxy in its
return to the Foundation.
10. THE WAR ENDS
Lathan Devers felt definitely uncomfortable, and vaguely resentful. He had received his own
decoration and withstood with mute stoicism the turgid oratory of the mayor which
accompanied the slip of crimson ribbon. That had ended his share of the ceremonies, but,
naturally, formality forced him to remain. And it was formality, chiefly – the type that couldn't
allow him to yawn noisily or to swing a foot comfortably onto a chair seat – that made him long
to be in space, where he belonged.
The Siwennese delegation, with Ducem Barr a lionized member, signed the Convention, and
Siwenna became the first province to pass directly from the Empire's political rule to the
Foundation's economic one.
Five Imperial Ships of the Line – captured when Siwenna rebelled behind the lines of the
Empire's Border Fleet – flashed overhead, huge and massive, detonating a roaring salute as
they passed over the city.
Nothing but drinking, etiquette, and small talk now.
A voice called him. It was Forell; the man who, Devers realized coldly, could buy twenty of him
with a morning's profits – but a Forell who now crooked a finger at him with genial
condescension.
He stepped out upon the balcony into the cool night wind, and bowed properly, while scowling
into his bristling beard. Barr was there, too; smiling. He said, "Devers, you'll have to come to my
rescue. I'm being accused of modesty, a horrible and thoroughly unnatural crime."
"Devers," Forell removed the fat cigar from the side of his mouth when he spoke, "Lord Barr
claims that your trip to Cleon's capital had nothing to do with the recall of Riose."
"Nothing at all, sir." Devers was curt. "We never saw the Emperor. The reports we picked up on
our way back concerning the trial, showed it up to be the purest frameup. There was a mess of
rigmarole about the general being tied up with subversive interests at the court."
"And he was innocent?"
"Riose?" interposed Barr. "Yes! By the Galaxy, yes. Brodrig was a traitor on general principles
but was never guilty of the specific accusations brought against him. It was a judicial farce; but
a necessary one, a predictable one, an inevitable one."
"By psychohistorical necessity, I presume." Forell rolled the phrase sonorously with the
humorous ease of long familiarity.
"Exactly." Barr grew serious. "It never penetrated earlier, but once it was over and I could ...
well ... look at the answers in the back of the book, the problem became simple. We can see,
now, that the social background of the Empire makes wars of conquest impossible for it. Under
weak Emperors, it is tom apart by generals competing for a worthless and surely death-bringing
throne. Under strong Emperors, the Empire is frozen into a paralytic rigor in which
disintegration apparently ceases for the moment, but only at the sacrifice of all possible
growth."
Forell growled bluntly through strong puffs, "You're not clear, Lord Barr."
Barr smiled slowly. "I suppose so. It's the difficulty of not being trained in psychohistory. Words
are a pretty fuzzy substitute for mathematical equations. But let's see now–"
Barr considered, while Forell relaxed, back to railing, and Devers looked into the velvet sky and
thought wonderingly of Trantor.
Then Barr said, "You see, sir, you – and Devers – and everyone no doubt, had the idea that
beating the Empire meant first prying apart the Emperor and his general. You, and Devers, and
everyone else were right – right all the time, as far as the principle of internal disunion was
concerned.
"You were wrong, however, in thinking that this internal split was something to be brought about
by individual acts, by inspirations of the moment. You tried bribery and lies. You appealed to
ambition and to fear. But you got nothing for all your pains. In fact, appearances were worse
after each attempt.
"And through all this wild threshing up of tiny ripples, the Seldon tidal wave continued onward,
quietly – but quite irresistibly."
Ducem Barr turned away, and looked over the railing at the lights of a rejoicing city. He said,
"There was a dead hand pushing all of us; the mighty general and the great Emperor; my world
and your world – the dead hand of Hari Seldon. He knew that a man like Riose would have to
fail, since it was his success that brought failure; and the greater the success, the surer the
failure."
Forell said dryly, "I can't say you're getting clearer."
"A moment," continued Barr earnestly. "Look at the situation. A weak general could never have
endangered us, obviously. A strong general during the time of a weak Emperor would never
have endangered us, either; for he would have turned his arms towards a much more fruitful
target. Events have shown that three-fourths of the Emperors of the last two centuries were
rebel generals and rebel viceroys before they were Emperors.
"So it is only the combination of strong Emperor and strong general that can harm the
Foundation; for a strong Emperor can not be dethroned easily, and a strong general is forced to
turn outwards, past the frontiers.
"But, what keeps the Emperor strong? What kept Cleon strong? It's obvious. He is strong,
because he permits no strong subjects. A courtier who becomes too rich, or a general who
becomes too popular is dangerous. All the recent history of the Empire proves that to any
Emperor intelligent enough to be strong.
"Riose won victories, so the Emperor grew suspicious. All the atmosphere of the times forced
him to be suspicious. Did Riose refuse a bribe? Very suspicious; ulterior motives. Did his most
trusted courtier suddenly favor Riose? Very suspicious; ulterior motives. It wasn't the individual
acts that were suspicious. Anything else would have done which is why our individual plots
were unnecessary and rather futile. It was the success of Riose that was suspicious. So he was
recalled, and accused, condemned, murdered. The Foundation wins again.
"Look, there is not a conceivable combination of events that does not result in the Foundation
winning. It was inevitable; whatever Riose did, whatever we did."
The Foundation magnate nodded ponderously. "So! But what if the Emperor and the general
had been the same person. Hey? What then? That's a case you didn't cover, so you haven't
proved your point yet."
Barr shrugged. "I can't prove anything; I haven't the mathematics. But I appeal to your reason.
With an Empire in which every aristocrat, every strong man, every pirate can aspire to the
Throne – and, as history shows, often successfully – what would happen to even a strong
Emperor who preoccupied himself with foreign wars at the extreme end of the Galaxy? How
long would he have to remain away from the capital before somebody raised the standards of
civil war and forced him home. The social environment of the Empire would make that time
short.
"I once told Riose that not all the Empire's strength could swerve the dead hand of Hari
Seldon."
"Good! Good!" Forell was expansively pleased. "Then you imply the Empire can never threaten
us again."
"It seems to me so," agreed Barr. "Frankly, Cleon may not live out the year, and there's going to
be a disputed succession almost as a matter of course, which might mean the last civil war for
the Empire."
"Then," said Forell, "there are no more enemies."
Barr was thoughtful. "There's a Second Foundation."
"At the other end of the Galaxy? Not for centuries."
Devers turned suddenly at this, and his face was dark as he faced Forell. "There are internal
enemies, perhaps."
"Are there?" asked Forell, coolly. "Who, for instance?"
"People, for instance, who might like to spread the wealth a bit, and keep it from concentrating
too much out of the hands that work for it. See what I mean?"
Slowly, Forell's gaze lost its contempt and grew one with the anger of Devers' own.
PART II
THE MULE
11. BRIDE AND GROOM
THE MULE Less is known of "The Mule" than of any character of comparable significance to
Galactic history. Even the period of his greatest renown is known to us chiefly through the eyes
of his antagonists and, principally, through those of a young bride....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
Bayta's first sight of Haven was entirely the contrary of spectacular. Her husband pointed it out
– a dull star lost in the emptiness of the Galaxy's edge. It was past the last sparse clusters, to
where straggling points of light gleamed lonely. And even among these it was poor and
inconspicuous.
Toran was quite aware that as the earliest prelude to married life, the Red Dwarf lacked
impressiveness and his lips curled self-consciously. "I know, Bay – It isn't exactly a proper
change, is it? I mean from the Foundation to this."
"A horrible change, Toran. I should never have married you."
And when his face looked momentarily hurt, before he caught himself, she said with her special
"cozy" tone, "All right, silly. Now let your lower lip droop and give me that special dying-duck
look – the one just before you're supposed to bury your head on my shoulder, while I stroke
your hair full of static electricity. You were fishing for some drivel, weren't you? You were
expecting me to say 'I'd be happy anywhere with you, Toran!' or 'The interstellar depths
themselves would be home, my sweet, were you but with me!' Now you admit it."
She pointed a finger at him and snatched it away an instant before his teeth closed upon it.
He said, "If I surrender, and admit you're right, will you prepare dinner?"
She nodded contentedly. He smiled, and just looked at her.
She wasn't beautiful on the grand scale to others – he admitted that – even if everybody did
look twice. Her hair was dark and glossy, though straight, her mouth a bit wide – but her
meticulous, close-textured eyebrows separated a white, unlined forehead from the warmest
mahogany eyes ever filled with smiles.
And behind a very sturdily-built and staunchly-defended facade of practical, unromantic,
hard-headedness towards life, there was just that little pool of softness that would never show if
you poked for it, but could be reached if you knew just how – and never let on that you were
looking for it.
Toran adjusted the controls unnecessarily and decided to relax. He was one interstellar jump,
and then several milli-microparsecs "on the straight" before manipulation by hand was
necessary. He leaned over backwards to look into the storeroom, where Bayta was juggling
appropriate containers.
There was quite a bit of smugness about his attitude towards Bayta – the satisfied awe that
marks the triumph of someone who has been hovering at the edge of an inferiority complex for
three years.
After all he was a provincial – and not merely a provincial, but the son of a renegade Trader.
And she was of the Foundation itself – and not merely that, but she could trace her ancestry
back to Mallow.
And with all that, a tiny quiver underneath. To take her back to Haven, with its rock-world and
cave-cities was bad enough. To have her face the traditional hostility of Trader for Foundation –
nomad for city dweller – was worse.
Still – After supper, the last jump!
Haven was an angry crimson blaze, and the second planet was a ruddy patch of light with
atmosphere-blurred rim and a half-sphere of darkness. Bayta leaned over the large view table
with its spidering of crisscross lines that centered Haven II neatly.
She said gravely, "I wish I had met your father first. If he takes a dislike to me–"
"Then," said Toran matter-of-factly, "you would be the first pretty girl to inspire that in him.
Before he lost his arm and stopped roving around the Galaxy, he – Well, if you ask him about it,
he'll talk to you about it till your ears wear down to a nubbin. After a while I got to thinking that
he was embroidering; because he never told the same story twice the same way–"
Haven II was rushing up at them now. The landlocked sea wheeled ponderously below them,
slate-gray in the lowering dimness and lost to sight, here and there, among the wispy clouds.
Mountains jutted raggedly along the coast.
The sea became wrinkled with nearness and, as it veered off past the horizon just at the end,
there was one vanishing glimpse of shore-hugging ice fields.
Toran grunted under the fierce deceleration, "Is your suit locked?"
Bayta's plump face was round and ruddy in the incasing sponge-foam of the internally-heated,
skin-clinging costume.
The ship lowered crunchingly on the open field just short of the lifting of the plateau.
They climbed out awkwardly into the solid darkness of the outer-galactic night, and Bayta
gasped as the sudden cold bit, and the thin wind swirled emptily. Toran seized her elbow and
nudged her into an awkward run over the smooth, packed ground towards the sparking of
artificial light in the distance.
The advancing guards met them halfway, and after a whispered exchange of words, they were
taken onward. The wind and the cold disappeared when the gate of rock opened and then
closed behind them. The warm interior, white with wall-light, was filled with an incongruous
humming bustle. Men looked up from their desks, and Toran produced documents.
They were waved onward after a short glance and Toran whispered to his wife, "Dad must have
fixed up the preliminaries. The usual lapse here is about five hours."
They burst into the open and Bayta said suddenly, "Oh, my–"
The cave city was in daylight – the white daylight of a young sun. Not that there was a sun, of
course. What should have been the sky was lost in the unfocused glow of an over-all brilliance.
And the warm air was properly thick and fragrant with greenery.
Bayta said, "Why, Toran, it's beautiful."
Toran grinned with anxious delight. "Well, now, Bay, it isn't like anything on the Foundation, of
course, but it's the biggest city on Haven II – twenty thousand people, you know – and you'll get
to like it. No amusement palaces, I'm afraid, but no secret police either."
"Oh, Torie, it's just like a toy city. It's all white and pink – and so clean."
"Well–" Toran looked at the city with her. The houses were two stories high for the most part,
and of the smooth vein rock indigenous to the region. The spires of the Foundation were
missing, and the colossal community houses of the Old Kingdoms – but the smallness was
there and the individuality; a relic of personal initiative in a Galaxy of mass life.
He snapped to sudden attention. "Bay – There's Dad! Right there – where I'm pointing, silly.
Don't you see him?"
She did. It was just the impression of a large man, waving frantically, fingers spread wide as
though groping wildly in air. The deep thunder of a drawn-out shout reached them. Bayta trailed
her husband, rushing downwards over the close-cropped lawn. She caught sight of a smaller
man, white-haired, almost lost to view behind the robust One-arm, who still waved and still
shouted.
Toran cried over his shoulder, "It's my father's half-brother. The one who's been to the
Foundation. You know."
They met in the grass, laughing and incoherent, and Toran's father let out a final whoop for
sheer joy. He hitched at his short jacket and adjusted the metal-chased belt that was his one
concession to luxury.
His eyes shifted from one of the youngsters to the other, and then he said, a little out of breath,
"You picked a rotten day to return home, boy!"
"What? Oh, it is Seldon's birthday, isn't it?"
"It is. I had to rent a car to make the trip here, and dragoon Randu to drive it. Not a public
vehicle to be had at gun's point."
His eyes were on Bayta now, and didn't leave. He spoke to her more softly, "I have the crystal
of you right here – and it's good, but I can see the fellow who took it was an amateur."
He had the small cube of transparency out of his jacket pocket and in the light the laughing little
face within sprang to vivid colored life as a miniature Bayta.
"That one!" said Bayta. "Now I wonder why Toran should send that caricature. I'm surprised you
let me come near you, sir."
"Are you now? Call me Fran. I'll have none of this fancy mess. For that, I think you can take my
arm, and we'll go on to the car. Till now I never did think my boy knew what he was ever up to. I
think I'll change that opinion. I think I'll have to change that opinion."
Toran said to his half uncle softly, "How is the old man these days? Does he still hound the
women?"
Randu puckered up all over his face when he smiled. "When he can, Toran, when he can.
There are times when he remembers that his next birthday will be his sixtieth, and that
disheartens him. But he shouts it down, this evil thought, and then he is himself. He is a Trader
of the ancient type. But you, Toran. Where did you find such a pretty wife?"
The young man chuckled and linked arms. "Do you want a three years' history at a gasp,
uncle?"
It was in the small living room of the home that Bayta struggled out of her traveling cloak and
hood and shook her hair loose. She sat down, crossing her knees, and returned the
appreciative stare of this large, ruddy man.
She said, "I know what you're trying to estimate, and I'll help you; Age, twenty-four, height,
five-four, weight, one-ten, educational specialty, history." She noticed that he always crooked
his stand so as to hide the missing arm. But now Fran leaned close and said, "Since you
mention it – weight, one-twenty."
He laughed loudly at her flush. Then he said to the company in general, "You can always tell a
woman's weight by her upper arm – with due experience, of course. Do you want a drink, Bay?"
"Among other things," she said, and they left together, while Toran busied himself at the book
shelves to check for new additions.
Fran returned alone and said, "She'll be down later."
He lowered himself heavily into the large comer chair and placed his stiff-jointed left leg on the
stool before it. The laughter had left his red face, and Toran turned to face him.
Fran said, "Well, you're home, boy, and I'm glad you are. I like your woman. She's no whining
ninny."
"I married her," said Toran simply.
"Well, that's another thing altogether, boy." His eyes darkened. "It's a foolish way to tie up the
future. In my longer life, and more experienced, I never did such a thing."
Randu interrupted from the comer where he stood quietly. "Now Franssart, what comparisons
are you making? Till your crash landing six years ago you were never in one spot long enough
to establish residence requirements for marriage, And since then, who would have you?"
The one-armed man jerked erect in his seat and replied hotly, "Many, you snowy dotard–"
Toran said with hasty tact, "It's largely a legal formality, Dad. The situation has its
conveniences."
"Mostly for the woman," grumbled Fran.
"And even if so," agreed Randu, "it's up to the boy to decide. Marriage is an old custom among
the Foundationers."
"The Foundationers are not fit models for an honest Trader," smoldered Fran.
Toran broke in again, "My wife is a Foundationer." He looked from one to the other, and then
said quietly, "She's coming."
The conversation took a general turn after the evening meal, which Fran had spiced with three
tales of reminiscence composed of equal parts of blood, women, profits, and embroidery. The
small televisor was on, and some classic drama was playing itself out in an unregarded
whisper. Randu had hitched himself into a more comfortable position on the low couch and
gazed past the slow smoke of his long pipe to where Bayta had knelt down upon the softness
of the white fur mat brought back once long ago from a trade mission and now spread out only
upon the most ceremonious occasions.
"You have studied history, my girl?" he asked, pleasantly.
Bayta nodded. "I was the despair of my teachers, but I learned a bit, eventually."
"A citation for scholarship," put in Toran, smugly, "that's all!"
"And what did you learn?" proceeded Randu, smoothly.
"Everything? Now?" laughed the girl.
The old man smiled gently. "Well then, what do you think of the Galactic situation?"
"I think," said Bayta, concisely, "that a Seldon crisis is pending – and that if it isn't then away
with the Seldon plan altogether. It is a failure."
("Whew," muttered Fran, from his comer. "What a way to speak of Seldon." But he said nothing
aloud.)
Randu sucked at his pipe speculatively. "Indeed? Why do you say that? I was to the
Foundation, you know, in my younger days, and I, too, once thought great dramatic thoughts.
But, now, why do you say that?"
"Well," Bayta's eyes misted with thought as she curled her bare toes into the white softness of
the rug and nestled her little chin in one plump hand, "it seems to me that the whole essence of
Seldon's plan was to create a world better than the ancient one of the Galactic Empire. It was
failing apart, that world, three centuries ago, when Seldon first established the Foundation –
and if history speaks truly, it was falling apart of the triple disease of inertia, despotism, and
maldistribution of the goods of the universe."
Randu nodded slowly, while Toran gazed with proud, luminous eyes at his wife, and Fran in the
comer clucked his tongue and carefully refilled his glass.
Bayta said, "If the story of Seldon is true, he foresaw the complete collapse of the Empire
through his Jaws of psychohistory, and was able to predict the necessary thirty thousand years
of barbarism before the establishment of a new Second Empire to restore civilization and
culture to humanity. It was the whole aim of his life-work to set up such conditions as would
insure a speedier rejuvenation,"
The deep voice of Fran burst out, "And that's why he established the two Foundations, honor
be to his name."
"And that's why he established the two Foundations," assented Bayta. "Our Foundation was a
gathering of the scientists of the dying Empire intended to carry on the science and learning of
man to new heights. And the Foundation was so situated in space and the historical
environment was such that through the careful calculations of his genius, Seldon foresaw that
in one thousand years, it would become a newer, greater Empire."
There was a reverent silence.
The girl said softly, "It's an old story. You all know it. For almost three centuries every human
being of the Foundation has known it. But I thought it would be appropriate to go through it –
just quickly. Today is Seldon's birthday, you know, and even if I am of the Foundation, and you
are of Haven, we have that in common–"
She lit a cigarette slowly, and watched the glowing tip absently. "The laws of history are as
absolute as the laws of physics, and if the probabilities of error are greater, it is only because
history does not deal with as many humans as physics does atoms, so that individual variations
count for more. Seldon predicted a series of crises through the thousand years of growth, each
of which would force a new turning of our history into a pre-calculated path. It is those crises
which direct us – and therefore a crisis must come now.
"Now!" she repeated, forcefully. "It's almost a century since the last one, and in that century,
every vice of the Empire has been repeated in the Foundation. Inertia! Our ruling class knows
one law; no change. Despotism! They know one rule; force. Maldistribution! They know one
desire; to hold what is theirs."
"While others starve!" roared Fran suddenly with a mighty blow of his fist upon the arm of his
chair. "Girl, your words are pearls. The fat guts on their moneybags ruin the Foundation, while
the brave Traders hide their poverty on dregs of worlds like Haven. It's a disgrace to Seldon, a
casting of dirt in his face, a spewing in his beard." He raised his arm high, and then his face
lengthened. "If I had my other arm! If – once – they had listened to me!"
"Dad," said Toran, "take it easy."
"Take it easy. Take it easy," his father mimicked savagely. "We'll live here and die here forever
– and you say, take it easy."
"That's our modern Lathan Devers," said Randu, gesturing with his pipe, "this Fran of ours.
Devers died in the slave mines eighty years ago with your husband's great-grandfather,
because he lacked wisdom and didn't lack heart–"
"Yes, by the Galaxy, I'd do the same if I were he," swore Fran. "Devers was the greatest Trader
in history – greater than the overblown windbag, Mallow, the Foundationers worship. If the
cutthroats who lord the Foundation killed him because he loved justice, the greater the
blood-debt owed them."
"Go on, girl," said Randu. "Go on, or, surely, he'll talk a the night and rave all the next day."
"There's nothing to go on about," she said, with a sudden gloom. "There must be a crisis, but I
don't know how to make one. The progressive forces on the Foundation are oppressed
fearfully. You Traders may have the will, but you are hunted and disunited. If all the forces of
good will in and out of the Foundation could combine–"
Fran's laugh was a raucous jeer. "Listen to her, Randu, listen to her. In and out of the
Foundation, she says. Girl, girl, there's no hope in the flab-sides of the Foundation. Among
them some hold the whip and the rest are whipped dead whipped. Not enough spunk left in the
whole rotten world to outface one good Trader."
Bayta's attempted interruptions broke feebly against the overwhelming wind.
Toran leaned over and put a hand over her mouth. "Dad," he said, coldly, "you've never been
on the Foundation. You know nothing about it. I tell you that the underground there is brave and
daring enough. I could tell you that Bayta was one of them–"
"All right, boy, no offense. Now, where's the cause for anger?" He was genuinely perturbed.
Toran drove on fervently, "The trouble with you, Dad, is that you've got a provincial outlook.
You think because some hundred thousand Traders scurry into holes on an unwanted planet at
the end of nowhere, that they're a great people. Of course, any tax collector from the
Foundation that gets here never leaves again, but that's cheap heroism. What would you do if
the Foundation sent a fleet?"
"We'd blast them," said Fran, sharply.
"And get blasted – with the balance in their favor. You're outnumbered, outarmed, outorganized
– and as soon as the Foundation thinks it worth its while, you'll realize that. So you had better
seek your allies – on the Foundation itself, if you can."
"Randu, said Fran, looking at his brother like a great, helpless bull.
Randu took his pipe away from his lips, "The boy's right, Fran. When you listen to the little
thoughts deep inside you, you know he is. But they're uncomfortable thoughts, so you drown
them out with that roar of yours. But they're still there. Toran, I'll tell you why I brought all this
up."
He puffed thoughtfully awhile, then dipped his pipe into the neck of the tray, waited for the silent
flash, and withdrew it clean. Slowly, he filled it again with precise tamps of his little finger.
He said, "Your little suggestion of Foundation's interest in us, Toran, is to the point. There have
been two recent visits lately – for tax purposes. The disturbing point is that the second visitor
was accompanied by a light patrol ship. They landed in Gleiar City – giving us the miss for a
change – and they never lifted off again, naturally. But now they'll surely be back. Your father is
aware of all this, Toran, he really is.
"Look at the stubborn rakehell. He knows Haven is in trouble, and he knows we're helpless, but
he repeats his formulas. It warms and protects him. But once he's had his say, and roared his
defiance, and feels he's discharged his duty as a man and a Bull Trader, why he's as
reasonable as any of us."
"Any of who?" asked Bayta.
He smiled at her. "We've formed a little group, Bayta – just in our city. We haven't done
anything, yet. We haven't even managed to contact the other cities yet, but it's a start."
"But towards what?"
Randu shook his head. "We don't know-yet. We hope for a miracle. We have decided that, as
you say, a Seldon crisis must be at hand." He gestured widely upwards. "The Galaxy is full of
the chips and splinters of the broken Empire. The generals swarm. Do you suppose the time
may come when one will grow bold?"
Bayta considered, and shook her head decisively, so that the long straight hair with the single
inward curl at the end swirled about her ears. "No, not a chance. There's not one of those
generals who doesn't know that an attack on the Foundation is suicide. Bel Riose of the old
Empire was a better man than any of them, and he attacked with the resources of a galaxy, and
couldn't win against the Seldon Plan. Is there one general that doesn't know that?"
"But what if we spur them on?"
"Into where? Into an atomic furnace? With what could you possibly spur them?"
"Well, there is one – a new one. In this past year or two, there has come word of a strange man
whom they call the Mule."
"The Mule?" She considered. "Ever hear of him, Torie?''
Toran shook his head. She said, "What about him?"
"I don't know. But he wins victories at, they say, impossible odds. The rumors may be
exaggerated, but it would be interesting, in any case, to become acquainted with him. Not every
man with sufficient ability and sufficient ambition would believe in Hari Seldon and his laws of
psychohistory. We could encourage that disbelief. He might attack."
"And the Foundation would win."
"Yes – but not necessarily easily. It might be a crisis, and we could take advantage of such a
crisis to force a compromise with the despots of the Foundation. At the worst, they would forget
us long enough to enable us to plan farther."
"What do you think, Torie?"
Toran smiled feebly and pulled at a loose brown curl that fell over one eye. "The way he
describes it, it can't hurt; but who is the Mule? What do you know of him, Randu?"
"Nothing yet. For that, we could use you, Toran. And your wife, if she's willing. We've talked of
this, your father and I. We've talked of this thoroughly."
"In what way, Randu? What do you want of us?" The young man cast a quick inquisitive look at
his wife.
"Have you had a honeymoon?"
"Well ... yes ... if you can call the trip from the Foundation a honeymoon."
"How about a better one on Kalgan? It's semitropical beaches – water sports – bird hunting –
quite the vacation spot. It's about seven thousand parsecs in-not too far."
"What's on Kalgan?"
"The Mule! His men, at least. He took it last month, and without a battle, though Kalgan's
warlord broadcast a threat to blow the planet to ionic dust before giving it up."
"Where's the warlord now?"
"He isn't," said Randu, with a shrug. "What do you say?"
"But what are we to do?"
"I don't know. Fran and I are old; we're provincial. The Traders of Haven are all essentially
provincial. Even you say so. Our trading is of a very restricted sort, and we're not the Galaxy
roamers our ancestors were, Shut up, Fran! But you two know the Galaxy. Bayta, especially,
speaks with a nice Foundation accent. We merely wish whatever you can find out. If you can
make contact ... but we wouldn't expect that. Suppose you two think it over. You can meet our
entire group if you wish ... oh, not before next week. You ought to have some time to catch your
breath."
There was a pause and then Fran roared, "Who wants; another drink? I mean, besides me?"
12. CAPTAIN AND MAYOR
Captain Han Pritcher was unused to the luxury of his surroundings and by no means
impressed. As a general thing, he discouraged self-analysis and all forms of philosophy and
metaphysics not directly connected with his work.
It helped.
His work consisted largely of what the War Department called "intelligence," the sophisticates,
"espionage," and the romanticists, "spy stuff." And, unfortunately, despite the frothy shrillness of
the televisors, "intelligence," "espionage," and "spy stuff" are at best a sordid business of
routine betrayal and bad faith. It is excused by society since it is in the "interest of the State,"
but since philosophy seemed always to lead Captain Pritcher to the conclusion that even in that
holy interest, society is much more easily soothed than one's own conscience – he discouraged
philosophy.
And now, in the luxury of the mayor's anteroom, his thoughts turned inward despite himself.
Men had been promoted over his head continuously, though of lesser ability – that much was
admitted. He had withstood an eternal rain of black marks and official reprimands, and survived
it. And stubbornly he had held to his own way in the firm belief that insubordination in that same
holy "interest of the State" would yet be recognized for the service it was.
So here he was in the anteroom of the mayor-with five soldiers as a respectful guard, and
probably a court-martial awaiting him.
The heavy, marble doors rolled apart smoothly, silently, revealing satiny walls, a red plastic
carpeting, and two more marble doors, metal-inlaid, within. Two officials in the straight-lined
costume of three centuries back, stepped out, and called:
"An audience to Captain Han Pritcher of Information."
They stepped back with a ceremonious bow as the captain started forward. His escort stopped
at the outer door, and he entered the inner alone.
On the other side of the doors, in a large room strangely simple, behind a large desk strangely
angular, sat a small man, almost lost in the immensity,
Mayor Indbur – successively the third of that name – was the grandson of the first Indbur, who
had been brutal and capable; and who had exhibited the first quality in spectacular fashion by
his manner of seizing power, and the latter by the skill with which he put an end to the last
farcical remnants of free election and the even greater skill with which he maintained a
relatively peaceful rule.
Mayor Indbur was also the son of the second Indbur, who was the first Mayor of the Foundation
to succeed to his post by right of birth – and who was only half his father, for he was merely
brutal.
So Mayor Indbur was the third of the name and the second to succeed by right of birth, and he
was the least of the three, for he was neither brutal nor capable – but merely an excellent
bookkeeper born wrong.
Indbur the Third was a peculiar combination of ersatz characteristics to all but himself.
To him, a stilted geometric love of arrangement was "system," an indefatigable and feverish
interest in the pettiest facets of day-to-day bureaucracy was "industry," indecision when right
was "caution," and blind stubbornness when wrong, "determination."
And withal he wasted no money, killed no man needlessly, and meant extremely well.
If Captain Pritcher's gloomy thoughts ran along these lines as he remained respectfully in place
before the large desk, the wooden arrangement of his features yielded no insight into the fact.
He neither coughed, shifted weight, nor shuffled his feet until the thin face of the mayor lifted
slowly as the busy stylus ceased in its task of marginal notations, and a sheet of close-printed
paper was lifted from one neat stack and placed upon another neat stack.
Mayor Indbur clasped his hands carefully before him, deliberately refraining from disturbing the
careful arrangement of desk accessories.
He said, in acknowledgment, "Captain Han Pritcher of Information."
And Captain Pritcher in strict obedience to protocol bent one knee nearly to the ground and
bowed his head until he heard the words of release.
"Arise, Captain Pritcher!"
The mayor said with an air of warm sympathy, "You are here, Captain Pritcher, because of
certain disciplinary action taken against yourself by your superior officer. The papers
concerning such action have come, in the ordinary course of events, to my notice, and since no
event in the Foundation is of disinterest to me, I took the trouble to ask for further information
on your case. You are not, I hope, surprised."
Captain Pritcher said unemotionally, "Excellence, no. Your justice is proverbial."
"Is it? Is it?" His tone was pleased, and the tinted contact lenses he wore caught the light in a
manner that imparted a hard, dry gleam to his eyes. Meticulously, he fanned out a series of
metal-bound folders before him. The parchment sheets within crackled sharply as he turned
them, his long finger following down the line as he spoke.
"I have your record here, captain – complete. You are forty-three and have been an Officer of
the Armed Forces for seventeen years. You were born in Loris, of Anacreonian parents, no
serious childhood diseases, an attack of myo ... well, that's of no importance ... education,
premilitary, at the Academy of Sciences, major, hyper-engines, academic standing ... hm-m-m,
very good, you are to be congratulated ... entered the Army as Under-Officer on the one
hundred second day of the 293rd year of the Foundation Era."
He lifted his eyes momentarily as he shifted the first folder, and opened the second.
"You see," he said, "in my administration, nothing is left to chance. Order! System!"
He lifted a pink, scented jelly-globule to his lips. It was his one vice, and but dolingly indulged
in. Witness the fact that the mayor's desk lacked that almost-inevitable atom flash for the
disposal of dead tobacco. For the mayor did not smoke.
Nor, as a matter of course, did his visitors.
The mayor's voice droned on, methodically, slurringly, mumblingly – now and then interspersed
with whispered comments of equally mild and equally ineffectual commendation or reproof.
Slowly, he replaced the folders as originally, in a single neat pile.
"Well, captain," he said, briskly, "your record is unusual. Your ability is outstanding, it would
seem, and your services valuable beyond question. I note that you have been wounded in the
line of duty twice, and that you have been awarded the Order of Merit for bravery beyond the
call of duty. Those are facts not lightly to be minimized."
Captain Pritcher's expressionless face did not soften. He remained stiffly erect. Protocol
required that a subject honored by an audience with the mayor may not sit down – a point
perhaps needlessly reinforced by the fact that only one chair existed in the room, the one
underneath the mayor. Protocol further required no statements other than those needed to
answer a direct question.
The mayor's eyes bore down hard upon the soldier and his voice grew pointed and heavy.
"However, you have not been promoted in ten years, and your superiors report, over and over
again, of the unbending stubbornness of your character. You are reported to be chronically
insubordinate, incapable of maintaining a correct attitude towards superior officers, apparently
uninterested in maintaining frictionless relationships with your colleagues, and an incurable
troublemaker, besides. How do you explain that, captain?"
"Excellence, I do what seems right to me. My deeds on behalf of the State, and my wounds in
that cause bear witness that what seems fight to me is also in the interest of the State."
"A soldierly statement, captain, but a dangerous doctrine. More of that, later. Specifically, you
are charged with refusing an assignment three times in the face of orders signed by my legal
delegates. What have you to say to that?"
"Excellence, the assignment lacks significance in a critical time, where matters of first
importance are being ignored."
"Ah, and who tells you these matters you speak of are of the first importance at all, and if they
are, who tells you further that they are ignored?"
"Excellence, these things are quite evident to me. My experience and my knowledge of events
– the value of neither of which my superiors deny – make it plain."
"But, my good captain, are you blind that you do not see that by arrogating to yourself the right
to determine Intelligence policy, you usurp the duties of your superior?"
"Excellence, my duty is primarily to the State, and not to my superior."
"Fallacious, for your superior has his superior, and that superior is myself, and I am the State.
But come, you shall have no cause to complain of this justice of mine that you say is proverbial.
State in your own words the nature of the breach in discipline that has brought all this on."
"Excellence, my duty is primarily to the State, and not to my living the life of a retired merchant
mariner upon the world of Kalgan. My instructions were to direct Foundation activity upon the
planet, perfect an organization to act as check upon the warlord of Kalgan, particularly as
regards his foreign policy."
"This is known to me. Continue!"
"Excellence, my reports have continually stressed the strategic positions of Kalgan and the
systems it controls. I have reported on the ambition of the warlord, his resources, his
determination to extend his domain and his essential friendliness – or, perhaps, neutrality –
towards the Foundation."
"I have read your reports thoroughly. Continue!"
"Excellence, I returned two months ago. At that time, there was no sign of impending war; no
sign of anything but an almost superfluity of ability to repel any conceivable attack. One month
ago, an unknown soldier of fortune took Kalgan without a fight. The man who was once warlord
of Kalgan is apparently no longer alive. Men do not speak of treason – they speak only of the
power and genius of this strange condottiere – this Mule."
"This who?" the mayor leaned forward, and looked offended.
"Excellence, he is known as the Mule. He is spoken of little, in a factual sense, but I have
gathered the scraps and fragments of knowledge and winnowed out the most probable of them.
He is apparently a man of neither birth nor standing. His father, unknown. His mother, dead in
childbirth. His upbringing, that of a vagabond. His education, that of the tramp worlds, and the
backwash alleys of space. He has no name other than that of the Mule, a name reportedly
applied by himself to himself, and signifying, by popular explanation, his immense physical
strength, and stubbornness of purpose."
"What is his military strength, captain? Never mind his physique."
"Excellence, men speak of huge fleets, but in this they may be influenced by the strange fall of
Kalgan. The territory he controls is not large, though its exact limits are not capable of definite
determination. Nevertheless, this man must be investigated."
"Hm-m-m. So! So!" The mayor fell into a reverie, and slowly with twenty-four strokes of his
stylus drew six squares in hexagonal arrangements upon the blank top sheet of a pad, which
he tore off, folded neatly in three parts and slipped into the wastepaper slot at his right hand. It
slid towards a clean and silent atomic disintegration.
"Now then, tell me, captain, what is the alternative? You have told me what 'must' be
investigated. What have you been ordered to investigate?"
"Excellence, there is a rat hole in space that, it seems, does not pay its taxes."
"Ah, and is that all? You are not aware, and have not been told that these men who do not pay
their taxes, are descendants of the wild Traders of our early days – anarchists, rebels, social
maniacs who claim Foundation ancestry and deride Foundation culture. You are not aware,
and have not been told, that this rat hole in space, is not one, but many; that these rat holes are
in greater number than we know; that these rat holes conspire together, one with the other, and
all with the criminal elements that still exist throughout Foundation territory. Even here, captain,
even here!"
The mayor's momentary fire subsided quickly. "You are not aware, captain?"
"Excellence, I have been told all this. But as servant of the State, I must serve faithfully – and
he serves most faithfully who serves Truth. Whatever the political implications of these dregs of
the ancient Traders – the warlords who have inherited the splinters of the old Empire have the
power. The Traders have neither arms nor resources. They have not even unity. I am not a tax
collector to be sent on a child's errand."
"Captain Pritcher, you are a soldier, and count guns. It is a failing to be allowed you up to the
point where it involves disobedience to myself. Take care. My justice is not simply weakness.
Captain, it has already been proven that the generals of the Imperial Age and the warlords of
the present age are equally impotent against us. Seldon's science which predicts the course of
the Foundation is based, not on individual heroism, as you seem to believe, but on the social
and economic trends of history. We have passed successfully through four crises already, have
we not?"
"Excellence, we have. Yet Seldon's science is known only to Seldon. We ourselves have but
faith. In the first three crises, as I have been carefully taught, the Foundation was led by wise
leaders who foresaw the nature of the crises and took the proper precautions. Otherwise – who
can say?"
"Yes, captain, but you omit the fourth crisis. Come, captain, we had no leadership worthy of the
name then, and we faced the cleverest opponent, the heaviest armor, the strongest force of all.
Yet we won by the inevitability of history."
"Excellence, that is true. But this history you mention became inevitable only after we had
fought desperately for over a year. The inevitable victory we won cost us half a thousand ships
and half a million men. Excellence, Seldon's plan helps those who help themselves."
Mayor Indbur frowned and grew suddenly tired of his patient exposition. It occurred to him that
there was a fallacy in condescension, since it was mistaken for permission to argue eternally; to
grow contentious; to wallow in dialectic. He said, stiffly, "Nevertheless, captain, Seldon
guarantees victory over the warlords, and I can not, in these busy times, indulge in a dispersal
of effort. These Traders you dismiss are Foundation-derived. A war with them would be a civil
war. Seldon's plan makes no guarantee there for us – since they and we are Foundation. So
they must be brought to heel. You have your orders."
"Excellence–"
"You have been asked no question, captain. You have your orders. You will obey those orders.
Further argument of any sort with myself or those representing myself will be considered
treason. You are excused."
Captain Han Pritcher knelt once more, then left with slow, backward steps.
Mayor Indbur, third of his name, and second mayor of Foundation history to be so by fight of
birth, recovered his equilibrium, and lifted another sheet of paper from the neat stack at his left.
It was a report on the saving of funds due to the reduction of the quantity of metal-foam edging
on the uniforms of the police force. Mayor Indbur crossed out a superfluous comma, corrected
a misspelling, made three marginal notations, and placed it upon the neat stack at his fight. He
lifted another sheet of paper from the neat stack at his left.
Captain Han Pritcher of Information found a Personal Capsule waiting for him when he returned
to barracks. It contained orders, terse and redly underlined with a stamped "URGENT"' across
it, and the whole initialed with a precise, capital "I".
Captain Han Pritcher was ordered to the "rebel world called Haven" in the strongest terms.
Captain Han Pritcher, alone in his light one-man speedster, set his course quietly and calmly
for Kalgan. He slept that night the sleep of a successfully stubborn man.
13. LIEUTENANT AND CLOWN
If, from a distance of seven thousand parsecs, the fall of Kalgan to the armies of the Mule had
produced reverberations that had excited the curiosity of an old Trader, the apprehension of a
dogged captain, and the annoyance of a meticulous mayor – to those on Kalgan itself, it
produced nothing and excited no one. It is the invariable lesson to humanity that distance in
time, and in space as well, lends focus. It is not recorded, incidentally, that the lesson has ever
been permanently learned.
Kalgan was – Kalgan. It alone of all that quadrant of the Galaxy seemed not to know that the
Empire had fallen, that the Stannells no longer ruled, that greatness had departed, and peace
had disappeared.
Kalgan was the luxury world. With the edifice of mankind crumbling, it maintained its integrity as
a producer of pleasure, a buyer of gold and a seller of leisure.
It escaped the harsher vicissitudes of history, for what conqueror would destroy or even
seriously damage a world so full of the ready cash that would buy immunity.
Yet even Kalgan had finally become the headquarters of a warlord and its softness had been
tempered to the exigencies of war.
Its tamed jungles, its mildly modeled shores, and its garishly glamorous cities echoed to the
march of imported mercenaries and impressed citizens. The worlds of its province had been
armed and its money invested in battleships rather than bribes for the first time in its history. Its
ruler proved beyond doubt that he was determined to defend what was his and eager to seize
what was others. He was a great one of the Galaxy, a war and peace maker, a builder of
Empire, an establisher of dynasty.
And an unknown with a ridiculous nickname had taken him – and his arms – and his budding
Empire – and had not even fought a battle.
So Kalgan was as before, and its uniformed citizens hurried back to their older life, while the
foreign professionals of war merged easily into the newer bands that descended.
Again as always, there were the elaborate luxury hunts for the cultivated animal life of the
jungles that never took human life; and the speedster bird-chases in the air above, that was
fatal only to the Great Birds.
In the cities, the escapers of the Galaxy could take their varieties of pleasure to suit their purse,
from the ethereal sky-palaces of spectacle and fantasy that opened their doors to the masses
at the jingle of half a credit, to the unmarked, unnoted haunts to which only those of great
wealth were of the cognoscenti.
To the vast flood, Toran and Bayta added not even a trickle. They registered their ship in the
huge common hangar on the East Peninsula, and gravitated to that compromise of the
middle-classes, the Inland Sea-where the pleasures were yet legal, and even respectable, and
the crowds not yet beyond endurance.
Bayta wore dark glasses against the light, and a thin, white robe against the heat. Warm-tinted
arms, scarcely the goldener for the sun, clasped her knees to her, and she stared with firm,
abstracted gaze at the length of her husband's outstretched body – almost shimmering in the
brilliance of white sun-splendor.
"Don't overdo it," she had said at first, but Toran was of a dying-red star, Despite three years of
the Foundation, sunlight was a luxury, and for four days now his skin, treated beforehand for
ray resistance, had not felt the harshness of clothing, except for the brief shorts.
Bayta huddled close to him on the sand and they spoke in whispers.
Toran's voice was gloomy, as it drifted upwards from a relaxed face, "No, I admit we're
nowhere. But where is he? Who is he? This mad world says nothing of him. Perhaps he doesn't
exist."
"He exists," replied Bayta, with lips that didn't move. "He's clever, that's all. And your uncle is
right. He's a man we could use – if there's time."
A short pause. Toran whispered, "Know what I've been doing, Bay? I'm just daydreaming
myself into a sun-stupor. Things figure themselves out so neatly – so sweetly." His voice nearly
trailed off, then returned, "Remember the way Dr. Amann talked back at college, Bay. The
Foundation can never lose, but that does not mean the rulers of the Foundation can't. Didn't the
real history of the Foundation begin when Salvor Hardin kicked out the Encyclopedists and took
over the planet Terminus as the first mayor? And then in the next century, didn't Hober Mallow
gain power by methods almost as drastic? That's twice the rulers were defeated, so it can be
done. So why not by us?"
"It's the oldest argument in the books. Torie. What a waste of good reverie."
"Is it? Follow it out. What's Haven? Isn't it part of the Foundation? If we become top dog, it's still
the Foundation winning, and only the current rulers losing."
"Lots of difference between 'we can' and 'we will.' You're just jabbering."
Toran squirmed. "Nuts, Bay, you're just in one of your sour, green moods. What do you want to
spoil my fun for? I'll just go to sleep if you don't mind."
But Bayta was craning her head, and suddenly – quite a non sequitur – she giggled, and
removed her glasses to look down the beach with only her palm shading her eyes.
Toran looked up, then lifted and twisted his shoulders to follow her glance.
Apparently, she was watching a spindly figure, feet in air, who teetered on his hands for the
amusement of a haphazard crowd. It was one of the swarming acrobatic beggars of the shore,
whose supple joints bent and snapped for the sake of the thrown coins.
A beach guard was motioning him on his way and with a surprising one-handed balance, the
clown brought a thumb to his nose in an upside-down gesture. The guard advanced
threateningly and reeled backward with a foot in his stomach. The clown righted himself without
interrupting the motion of the initial kick and was away, while the frothing guard was held off by
a thoroughly unsympathetic crowd.
The clown made his way raggedly down the beach. He brushed past many, hesitated often,
stopped nowhere. The original crowd had dispersed. The guard had departed.
"He's a queer fellow," said Bayta, with amusement, and Toran agreed indifferently. The clown
was close enough now to be seen clearly. His thin face drew together in front into a nose of
generous planes and fleshy tip that seemed all but prehensile. His long, lean limbs and spidery
body, accentuated by his costume, moved easily and with grace, but with just a suggestion of
having been thrown together at random.
To look was to smile.
The clown seemed suddenly aware of their regard, for he stopped after he had passed, and,
with a sharp turn, approached. His large, brown eyes fastened upon Bayta.
She found herself disconcerted.
The clown smiled, but it only saddened his beaked face, and when he spoke it was with the
soft, elaborate phrasing of the Central Sectors.
"Were I to use the wits the good Spirits gave me," he said, "then I would say this lady can not
exist – for what sane man would hold a dream to be reality. Yet rather would I not be sane and
lend belief to charmed, enchanted eyes."
Bayta's own eyes opened wide. She said, "Wow!"
Toran laughed, "Oh, you enchantress. Go ahead, Bay, that deserves a five-credit piece. Let
him have it."
But the clown was forward with a jump. "No, my lady, mistake me not. I spoke for money not at
all, but for bright eyes and sweet face."
"Well, thanks," then, to Toran, "Golly, you think the sun's in his eyes?"
"Yet not alone for eyes and face," babbled the clown, as his words hurled past each other in
heightened frenzy, "but also for a mind, clear and sturdy – and kind as well."
Toran rose to his feet, reached for the white robe he had crooked his arm about for four days,
and slipped into it.
"Now, bud," he said, "suppose you tell me what you want, and stop annoying the lady."
The clown fell back a frightened step, his meager body cringing. "Now, sure I meant no harm. I
am a stranger here, and it's been said I am of addled wits; yet there is something in a face that I
can read. Behind this lady's fairness, there is a heart that's kind, and that would help me in my
trouble for all I speak so boldly."
"Will five credits cure your trouble?" said Toran, dryly, and held out the coin.
But the clown did not move to take it, and Bayta said, "Let me talk to him, Torie," She added
swiftly, and in an undertone, "There's no use being annoyed at his silly way of talking. That's
just his dialect; and our speech is probably as strange to him."
She said, "What is your trouble? You're not worried about the guard, are you? He won't bother
you."
"Oh, no, not he. He's but a windlet that blows the dust about my ankles. There is another that I
flee, and he is a storm that sweeps the worlds aside and throws them plunging at each other. A
week ago, I ran away, have slept in city streets, and hid in city crowds. I've looked in many
faces for help in need. I find it here." He repeated the last phrase in softer, anxious tones, and
his large eyes were troubled, "I find it here."
"Now," said Bayta, reasonably, "I would like to help, but really, friend, I'm no protection against
a world-sweeping storm. To be truthful about it, I could use–"
There was an uplifted, powerful voice that bore down upon them.
"Now, then, you mud-spawned rascal–"
It was the beach guard, with a fire-red face, and snarling mouth, that approached at a run. He
pointed with his low-power stun pistol.
"Hold him, you two. Don't let him get away." His heavy hand fell upon the clown's thin shoulder,
so that a whimper was squeezed out of him.
Toran said, "What's he done?"
"What's he done? What's he done? Well, now, that's good!" The guard reached inside the
dangling pocket attached to his belt, and removed a purple handkerchief, with which he
mopped his bare neck. He said with relish. "I'll tell you what he's done. He's run away. The
word's all over Kalgan and I would have recognized him before this if he had been on his feet
instead of on his hawkface top." And he rattled his prey in a fierce good humor.
Bayta said with a smile, "Now where did he escape from, sir?"
The guard raised his voice. A crowd was gathering, popeyed and jabbering, and with the
increase of audience, the guard's sense of importance increased in direct ratio.
"Where did he escape from?" he declaimed in high sarcasm. "Why, I suppose you've heard of
the Mule, now."
All jabbering stopped, and Bayta felt a sudden iciness trickle down into her stomach. The clown
had eyes only for her-he still quivered in the guard's brawny grasp.
"And who," continued the guard heavily, "would this infernal ragged piece be, but his lordship's
own court fool who's run away." He jarred his captive with a massive shake, "Do you admit it,
fool?"
There was only white fear for answer, and the soundless sibilance of Bayta's voice close to
Toran's ear.
Toran stepped forward to the guard in friendly fashion, "Now, my man, suppose you take your
hand away for just a while. This entertainer you hold has been dancing for us and has not yet
danced out his fee."
"Here!" The guard's voice rose in sudden concern. "There's a reward–"
"You'll have it, if you can prove he's the man you want. Suppose you withdraw till then. You
know that you're interfering with a guest, which could be serious for you."
"But you're interfering with his lordship and that will be serious for you." He shook the clown
once again. "Return the man's fee, carrion."
Toran's hand moved quickly and the guard's stun pistol was wrenched away with half a finger
nearly following it. The guard howled his pain and rage. Toran shoved him violently aside, and
the clown, unhanded, scuttled behind him.
The crowd, whose fringes were now lost to the eye, paid little attention to the latest
development. There was among them a craning of necks, and a centrifugal motion as if many
had decided to increase their distance from the center of activity.
Then there was a bustle, and a rough order in the distance. A corridor formed itself and two
men strode through, electric whips in careless readiness. Upon each purple blouse was
designed an angular shaft of lightning with a splitting planet underneath.
A dark giant, in lieutenant's uniform, followed them; dark of skin, and hair, and scowl.
The dark man spoke with the dangerous softness that meant he had little need of shouting to
enforce his whims. He said, "Are you the man who notified us?"
The guard was still holding his wrenched hand, and with a pain-distorted face mumbled, "I
claim the reward, your mightiness, and I accuse that man–"
"You'll get your reward," said the lieutenant, without looking at him. He motioned curtly to his
men, "Take him."
Toran felt the clown tearing at his robe with a maddened grip.
He raised his voice and kept it from shaking, "I'm sorry, lieutenant; this man is mine."
The soldiers took the statement without blinking. One raised his whip casually, but the
lieutenant's snapped order brought it down.
His dark mightiness swung forward and planted his square body before Toran, "Who are you?"
And the answer rang out, "A citizen of the Foundation."
It worked-with the crowd, at any rate. The pent-up silence broke into an intense hum. The
Mule's name might excite fear, but it was, after all, a new name and scarcely stuck as deeply in
the vitals as the old one of the Foundation – that had destroyed the Empire – and the fear of
which ruled a quadrant of the Galaxy with ruthless despotism.
The lieutenant kept face. He said, "Are you aware of the identity of the man behind you?"
"I have been told he's a runaway from the court of your leader, but my only sure knowledge is
that he is a friend of mine. You'll need firm proof of his identity to take him."
There were high-pitched sighs from the crowd, but the lieutenant let it pass. "Have you your
papers of Foundation citizenship with you?"
"At my ship."
"You realize that your actions are illegal? I can have you shot."
"Undoubtedly. But then you would have shot a Foundation citizen and it is quite likely that your
body would be sent to the Foundation – quartered – as part compensation. It's been done by
other warlords."
The lieutenant wet his lips. The statement was true.
He said, "Your name?"
Toran followed up his advantage, "I will answer further questions at my ship. You can get the
cell number at the Hangar; it is registered under the name 'Bayta'."
"You won't give up the runaway?"
"To the Mule, perhaps. Send your master!"
The conversation had degenerated to a whisper and the lieutenant turned sharply away.
"Disperse the crowd!" he said to his men, with suppressed ferocity.
The electric whips rose and fell. There were shrieks and a vast surge of separation and flight.
Toran interrupted his reverie only once on their way back to the Hangar. He said, almost to
himself, "Galaxy, Bay, what a time I had! I was so scared–"
"Yes," she said, with a voice that still shook, and eyes that still showed something akin to
worship, "it was quite out of character."
"Well, I still don't know what happened. I just got up there with a stun pistol that I wasn't even
sure I knew how to use, and talked back to him. I don't know why I did it."
He looked across the aisle of the short-run air vessel that was carrying them out of the beach
area, to the seat on which the Mule's clown scrunched up in sleep, and added distastefully, "It
was the hardest thing I've ever done."
The lieutenant stood respectfully before the colonel of the garrison, and the colonel looked at
him and said, "Well done. Your part's over now."
But the lieutenant did not retire immediately. He said darkly, "The Mule has lost face before a
mob, sir. It will be necessary to undertake disciplinary action to restore proper atmosphere of
respect."
"Those measures have already been taken."
The lieutenant half turned, then, almost with resentment, "I'm willing to agree, sir, that orders
are orders, but standing before that man with his stun pistol and swallowing his insolence
whole, was the hardest thing I've ever done."
14. THE MUTANT
The "hangar" on Kalgan is an institution peculiar unto itself, born of the need for the disposition
of the vast number of ships brought in by the visitors from abroad, and the simultaneous and
consequent vast need for living accommodations for the same. The original bright one who had
thought of the obvious solution had quickly become a millionaire. His heirs – by birth or finance
– were easily among the richest on Kalgan.
The "hangar" spreads fatly over square miles of territory, and "hangar" does not describe it at
all sufficiently. It is essentially a hotel – for ships. The traveler pays in advance and his ship is
awarded a berth from which it can take off into space at any desired moment. The visitor then
lives in his ship as always. The ordinary hotel services such as the replacement of food and
medical supplies at special rates, simple servicing of the ship itself, special intra-Kalgan
transportation for a nominal sum are to be had, of course.
As a result, the visitor combines hangar space and hotel bill into one, at a saving. The owners
sell temporary use of ground space at ample profits. The government collects huge taxes.
Everyone has fun. Nobody loses. Simple!
The man who made his way down the shadow-borders of the wide corridors that connected the
multitudinous wings of the "hangar" had in the past speculated on the novelty and usefulness of
the system described above, but these were reflections for idle moments – distinctly unsuitable
at present.
The ships hulked in their height and breadth down the long lines of carefully aligned cells, and
the man discarded line after line. He was an expert at what he was doing now and if his
preliminary study of the hangar registry had failed to give specific information beyond the
doubtful indication of a specific wing – one containing hundreds of ships – his specialized
knowledge could winnow those hundreds into one.
There was the ghost of a sigh in the silence, as the man stopped and faded down one of the
lines; a crawling insect beneath the notice of the arrogant metal monsters that rested there.
Here and there the sparkling of light from a porthole would indicate the presence of an early
returner from the organized pleasures to simpler – or more private – pleasures of his own.
The man halted, and would have smiled if he ever smiled. Certainly the convolutions of his
brain performed the mental equivalent of a smile.
The ship he stopped at was sleek and obviously fast. The peculiarity of its design was what he
wanted. It was not a usual model – and these days most of the ships of this quadrant of the
Galaxy either imitated Foundation design or were built by Foundation technicians. But this was
special. This was a Foundation ship – if only because of the tiny bulges in the skin that were
the nodes of the protective screen that only a Foundation ship could possess. There were other
indications, too.
The man felt no hesitation.
The electronic barrier strung across the line of the ships as a concession to privacy on the part
of the management was not at all important to him. It parted easily, and without activating the
alarm, at the use of the very special neutralizing force he had at his disposal.
So the first knowledge within the ship of the intruder without was the casual and almost friendly
signal of the muted buzzer in the ship's living room that was the result of a palm placed over the
little photocell just one side of the main air lock.
And while that successful search went on, Toran and Bayta felt only the most precarious
security within the steel walls of the Bayta. The Mule's clown who had reported that within his
narrow compass of body he held the lordly name of Magnifico Giganticus, sat hunched over the
table and gobbled at the food set before him.
His sad, brown eyes lifted from his meat only to follow Bayta's movements in the combined
kitchen and larder where he ate.
"The thanks of a weak one are of but little value," he muttered, "but you have them, for truly, in
this past week, little but scraps have come my way – and for all my body is small, yet is my
appetite unseemly great."
"Well, then, eat!" said Bayta, with a smile. "Don't waste your time on thanks. Isn't there a
Central Galaxy proverb about gratitude that I once heard?"
"Truly there is, my lady. For a wise man, I have been told, once said, 'Gratitude is best and
most effective when it does not evaporate itself in empty phrases.' But alas, my lady, I am but a
mass of empty phrases, it would seem. When my empty phrases pleased the Mule, it brought
me a court dress, and a grand name – for, see you, it was originally simply Bobo, one that
pleases him not – and then when my empty phrases pleased him not, it would bring upon my
poor bones beatings and whippings."
Toran entered from the pilot room, "Nothing to do now but wait, Bay. I hope the Mule is capable
of understanding that a Foundation ship is Foundation territory."
Magnifico Giganticus, once Bobo, opened his eyes wide and exclaimed, "How great is the
Foundation before which even the cruel servants of the Mule tremble."
"Have you heard of the Foundation, too?" asked Bayta, with a little smile.
"And who has not?" Magnifico's voice was a mysterious whisper. "There are those who say it is
a world of great magic, of fires that can consume planets, and secrets of mighty strength. They
say that not the highest nobility of the Galaxy could achieve the honor and deference
considered only the natural due of a simple man who could say 'I am a citizen of the
Foundation,' – were he only a salvage miner of space, or a nothing like myself."
Bayta said, "Now, Magnifico, you'll never finish if you make speeches. Here, I'll get you a little
flavored milk. It's good."
She placed a pitcher of it upon the table and motioned Toran out of the room.
"Torie, what are we going to do now – about him?" and she motioned towards the kitchen.
"How do you mean?"
"If the Mule comes, are we going to give him up?"
"Well, what else, Bay?" He sounded harassed, and the gesture with which he shoved back the
moist curl upon his forehead testified to that.
He continued impatiently, "Before I came here I had a sort of vague idea that all we had to do
was to ask for the Mule, and then get down to business – just business, you know, nothing
definite."
"I know what you mean, Torie. I wasn't much hoping to see the Mule myself, but I did think we
could pick up some firsthand knowledge of the mess, and then pass it over to people who know
a little more about this interstellar intrigue. I'm no storybook spy."
"You're not behind me, Bay." He folded his arms and frowned. "What a situation! You'd never
know there was a person like the Mule, except for this last queer break. Do you suppose he'll
come for his clown?"
Bayta looked up at him. "I don't know that I want him to. I don't know what to say or do. Do
you?"
The inner buzzer sounded with its intermittent burring noise. Bayta's lips moved wordlessly,
"The Mule!"
Magnifico was in the doorway, eyes wide, his voice a whimper, "The Mule?"
Toran murmured, "I've got to let them in."
A contact opened the air lock and the outer door closed behind the newcomer. The scanner
showed only a single shadowed figure.
"It's only one person," said Toran, with open relief, and his voice was almost shaky as he bent
toward the signal tube, "Who are you?"
"You'd better let me in and find out, hadn't you?" The words came thinly out the receiver.
"I'll inform you that this is a Foundation ship and consequently Foundation territory by
international treaty."
"I know that."
"Come with your arms free, or I'll shoot. I'm well-armed."
"Done!"
Toran opened the inner door and closed contact on his blast pistol, thumb hovering over the
pressure point. There was the sound of footsteps and then the door swung open, and Magnifico
cried out, "It's not the Mule. It's but a man."
The "man" bowed to the clown somberly, "Very accurate. I'm not the Mule." He held his hands
apart, "I'm not armed, and I come on a peaceful errand. You might relax and put the blast pistol
away. Your hand isn't steady enough for my peace of mind."
"Who are you?" asked Toran, brusquely.
"I might ask you that," said the stranger, coolly, "since you're the one under false pretenses, not
I."
"How so?"
"You're the one who claims to be a Foundation citizen when there's not an authorized Trader
on the planet."
"That's not so. How would you know?"
"Because I am a Foundation citizen, and have my papers to prove it. Where are yours?"
"I think you'd better get out."
"I think not. If you know anything about Foundation methods, and despite your imposture you
might, you'd know that if I don't return alive to my ship at a specified time, there'll be a signal at
the nearest Foundation headquarters so I doubt if your weapons will have much effect,
practically speaking."
There was an irresolute silence and then Bayta said, calmly, "Put the blaster away, Toran, and
take him at face value. He sounds like the real thing."
"Thank you," said the stranger.
Toran put his gun on the chair beside him, "Suppose you explain all this now."
The stranger remained standing. He was long of bone and large of limb. His face consisted of
hard flat planes and it was somehow evident that he never smiled. But his eyes lacked
hardness.
He said, "News travels quickly, especially when it is apparently beyond belief. I don't suppose
there's a person on Kalgan who doesn't know that the Mule's men were kicked in the teeth
today by two tourists from the Foundation. I knew of the important details before evening, and,
as I said, there are no Foundation tourists aside from myself on the planet. We know about
those things."
"Who are the 'we'?"
"'We' are – 'we'! Myself for one! I knew you were at the Hangar – you had been overheard to
say so. I had my ways of checking the registry, and my ways of finding the ship."
He turned to Bayta suddenly, "You're from the Foundation – by birth, aren't you?"
"Am I?"
"You're a member of the democratic opposition – they call it 'the underground.' I don't
remember your name, but I do the face. You got out only recently – and wouldn't have if you
were more important."
Bayta shrugged, "You know a lot."
"I do. You escaped with a man. That one?"
"Does it matter what I say?"
"No. I merely want a thorough mutual understanding. I believe that the password during the
week you left so hastily was 'Seldon, Hardin, and Freedom.' Porfirat Hart was your section
leader. "
"Where'd you get that?" Bayta was suddenly fierce. "Did the police get him?" Toran held her
back, but she shook herself loose and advanced.
The man from the Foundation said quietly, "Nobody has him. It's just that the underground
spreads widely and in queer places. I'm Captain Han Pritcher of Information, and I'm a section
leader myself – never mind under what name."
He waited, then said, "No, you don't have to believe me. In our business it is better to overdo
suspicion than the opposite. But I'd better get past the preliminaries."
"Yes," said Toran, "suppose you do."
"May I sit down? Thanks." Captain Pritcher swung a long leg across his knee and let an arm
swing loose over the back of the chair. "I'll start out by saying that I don't know what all this is
about – from your angle. You two aren't from the Foundation, but it's not a hard guess that
you're from one of the independent Trading worlds. That doesn't bother me overmuch. But out
of curiosity, what do you want with that fellow, that clown you snatched to safety? You're risking
your life to hold on to him."
"I can't tell you that."
"Hm-m-m. Well, I didn't think you would. But if you're waiting for the Mule himself to come
behind a fanfarade of horns, drums, and electric organs – relax! The Mule doesn't work that
way."
"What?" It came from both Toran and Bayta, and in the comer where Magnifico lurked with ears
almost visibly expanded, there was a sudden joyful start.
"That's right. I've been trying to contact him myself, and doing a rather more thorough job of it
than you two amateurs can. It won't work. The man makes no personal appearance, does not
allow himself to be photographed or simulated, and is seen only by his most intimate
associates."
"Is that supposed to explain your interest in us, captain?" questioned Toran.
"No. That clown is the key. That clown is one of the very few that have seen him. I want him.
He may be the proof I need – and I need something, Galaxy knows – to awaken the
Foundation."
"It needs awakening?" broke in Bayta with sudden sharpness. "Against what? And in what role
do you act as alarm, that of rebel democrat or of secret police and provocateur?"
The captain's face set in its hard lines. "When the entire Foundation is threatened, Madame
Revolutionary, both democrats and tyrants perish. Let us save the tyrants from a greater, that
we may overthrow them in their turn."
"Who's the greater tyrant you speak of?" flared Bayta.
"The Mule! I know a bit about him, enough to have been my death several times over already, if
I had moved less nimbly. Send the clown out of the room. This will require privacy."
"Magnifico," said Bayta, with a gesture, and the clown left without a sound.
The captain's voice was grave and intense, and low enough so that Toran and Bayta drew
close.
He said, "The Mule is a shrewd operator – far too shrewd not to realize the advantage of the
magnetism and glamour of personal leadership. If he gives that up, it's for a reason. That
reason must be the fact that personal contact would reveal something that is of overwhelming
importance not to reveal."
He waved aside questions, and continued more quickly, "I went back to his birthplace for this,
and questioned people who for their knowledge will not live long. Few enough are still alive.
They remember the baby born thirty years before – the death of his mother – his strange youth.
The Mule is not a human being!"
And his two listeners drew back in horror at the misty implications. Neither understood, fully or
clearly, but the menace of the phrase was definite.
The captain continued, "He is a mutant, and obviously from his subsequent career, a highly
successful one. I don't know his powers or the exact extent to which he is what our thrillers
would call a 'superman,' but the rise from nothing to the conqueror of Kalgan's warlord in two
years is revealing. You see, don't you, the danger? Can a genetic accident of unpredictable
biological properties be taken into account in the Seldon plan?"
Slowly, Bayta spoke, "I don't believe it. This is some sort of complicated trickery. Why didn't the
Mule's men kill us when they could have, if he's a superman?"
"I told you that I don't know the extent of his mutation. He may not be ready, yet, for the
Foundation, and it would be a sign of the greatest wisdom to resist provocation until ready. Now
let me speak to the clown."
The captain faced the trembling Magnifico, who obviously distrusted this huge, hard man who
faced him.
The captain began slowly, "Have you seen the Mule with your own eyes?"
"I have but too well, respected sir. And felt the weight of his arm with my own body as well."
"I have no doubt of that. Can you describe him?"
"It is frightening to recall him, respected sir. He is a man of mighty frame. Against him, even you
would be but a spindling. His hair is of a burning crimson, and with all my strength and weight I
could not pull down his arm, once extended – not a hair's thickness." Magnifico's thinness
seemed to collapse upon itself in a huddle of arms and legs. "Often, to amuse his generals or to
amuse only himself, he would suspend me by one finger in my belt from a fearful height, while I
chattered poetry. It was only after the twentieth verse that I was withdrawn, and each
improvised and each a perfect rhyme, or else start over. He is a man of overpowering might,
respected sir, and cruel in the use of his power – and his eyes, respected sir, no one sees."
"What? What's that last?"
"He wears spectacles, respected sir, of a curious nature. It is said that they are opaque and that
he sees by a powerful magic that far transcends human powers. I have heard," and his voice
was small and mysterious, "that to see his eyes is to see death; that he kills with his eyes,
respected sir."
Magnifico's eyes wheeled quickly from one watching face to another. He quavered, "It is true.
As I live, it is true. "
Bayta drew a long breath, "Sounds like you're right, captain. Do you want to take over?"
"Well, let's look at the situation. You don't owe anything here? The hangar's barrier above is
free?"
"I can leave any time."
"Then leave. The Mule may not wish to antagonize the Foundation, but he runs a frightful risk in
letting Magnifico get away. It probably accounts for the hue and cry after the poor devil in the
first place. So there may be ships waiting for you upstairs. If you're lost in space, who's to pin
the crime?"
"You're right," agreed Toran, bleakly.
"However, you've got a shield and you're probably speedier than anything they've got, so as
soon as you're clear of the atmosphere make the circle in neutral to the other hemisphere, then
just cut a track outwards at top acceleration."
"Yes," said Bayta coldly, "and when we are back on the Foundation, what then, captain?"
"Why, you are then co-operative citizens of Kalgan, are you not? I know nothing to the contrary,
do I?"
Nothing was said. Toran turned to the controls. There was an imperceptible lurch.
It was when Toran had left Kalgan sufficiently far in the rear to attempt his first interstellar jump,
that Captain Pritcher's face first creased slightly – for no ship of the Mule had in any way
attempted to bar their leaving.
"Looks like he's letting us carry off Magnifico," said Toran. "Not so good for your story."
"Unless," corrected the captain, "he wants us to carry him off, in which case it's not so good for
the Foundation."
It was after the last jump, when within neutral-flight distance of the Foundation, that the first
hyperwave news broadcast reached the ship.
And there was one news item barely mentioned. It seemed that a warlord – unidentified by the
bored speaker – had made representations to the Foundation concerning the forceful abduction
of a member of his court. The announcer went on to the sports news.
Captain Pritcher said icily, "He's one step ahead of us after all." Thoughtfully, he added, "He's
ready for the Foundation, and he uses this as an excuse for action. It makes things more
difficult for us. We will have to act before we are really ready."
15. THE PSYCHOLOGIST
There was reason to the fact that the element known as "pure science" was the freest form of
life on the Foundation. In a Galaxy where the predominance – and even survival – of the
Foundation still rested upon the superiority of its technology – even despite its large access of
physical power in the last century and a half – a certain immunity adhered to The Scientist. He
was needed, and he knew it.
Likewise, there was reason to the fact that Ebling Mis – only those who did not know him added
his titles to his name – was the freest form of life in the "pure science" of the Foundation. In a
world where science was respected, he was The Scientist – with capital letters and no smile.
He was needed, and he knew it.
And so it happened, that when others bent their knee, he refused and added loudly that his
ancestors in their time bowed no knee to any stinking mayor. And in his ancestors' time the
mayor was elected anyhow, and kicked out at will, and that the only people that inherited
anything by right of birth were the congenital idiots.
So it also happened, that when Ebling Mis decided to allow Indbur to honor him with an
audience, he did not wait for the usual rigid line of command to pass his request up and the
favored reply down, but, having thrown the less disreputable of his two formal jackets over his
shoulders and pounded an odd hat of impossible design on one side of his head, and lit a
forbidden cigar into the bargain, he barged past two ineffectually bleating guards and into the
mayor's palace.
The first notice his excellence received of the intrusion was when from his garden he heard the
gradually nearing uproar of expostulation and the answering bull-roar of inarticulate swearing.
Slowly, Indbur lay down his trowel; slowly, he stood up; and slowly, he frowned. For Indbur
allowed himself a daily vacation from work, and for two hours in the early afternoon, weather
permitting, he was in his garden. There in his garden, the blooms grew in squares and
triangles, interlaced in a severe order of red and yellow, with little dashes of violet at the apices,
and greenery bordering the whole in rigid lines. There in his garden no one disturbed him – no
one!
Indbur peeled off his soil-stained gloves as he advanced toward the little garden door.
Inevitably, he said, "What is the meaning of this?"
It is the precise question and the precise wording thereof that has been put to the atmosphere
on such occasions by an incredible variety of men since humanity was invented. It is not
recorded that it has ever been asked for any purpose other than dignified effect.
But the answer was literal this time, for Mis's body came plunging through with a bellow, and a
shake of a fist at the ones who were still holding tatters of his cloak.
Indbur motioned them away with a solemn, displeased frown, and Mis bent to pick up his ruin of
a hat, shake about a quarter of the gathered dirt off it, thrust it under his armpit and say:
"Look here, Indbur, those unprintable minions of yours will be charged for one good cloak. Lots
of good wear left in this cloak." He puffed and wiped his forehead with just a trace of
theatricality.
The mayor stood stiff with displeasure, and said haughtily from the peak of his five-foot-two, "It
has not been brought to my attention, Mis, that you have requested an audience. You have
certainly not been assigned one."
Ebling Mis looked down at his mayor with what was apparently shocked disbelief, "Ga-LAX-y,
Indbur, didn't you get my note yesterday? I handed it to a flunky in purple uniform day before. I
would have handed it to you direct, but I know how you like formality."
"Formality!" Indbur turned up exasperated eyes. Then, strenuously, "Have you ever heard of
proper organization? At all future times you are to submit your request for an audience,
properly made out in triplicate, at the government office intended for the purpose. You are then
to wait until the ordinary course of events brings you notification of the time of audience to be
granted. You are then to appear, properly clothed – properly clothed, do you understand – and
with proper respect, too. You may leave."
"What's wrong with my clothes?" demanded Mis, hotly. "Best cloak I had till those unprintable
fiends got their claws on it. I'll leave just as soon as I deliver what I came to deliver. "Ga-LAX-y,
if it didn't involve a Seldon Crisis, I would leave right now."
"Seldon crisis!" Indbur exhibited first interest. Mis was a great psychologist – a democrat, boor,
and rebel certainly, but a psychologist, too. In his uncertainty, the mayor even failed to put into
words the inner pang that stabbed suddenly when Mis plucked a casual bloom, held it to his
nostrils expectantly, then flipped it away with a wrinkled nose.
Indbur said coldly, "Would you follow me? This garden wasn't made for serious conversation."
He felt better in his built-up chair behind his large desk from which he could look down on the
few hairs that quite ineffectually hid Mis's pink scalp-skin. He felt much better when Mis cast a
series of automatic glances about him for a non-existent chair and then remained standing in
uneasy shifting fashion. He felt best of all when in response to a careful pressure of the correct
contact, a liveried underling scurried in, bowed his way to the desk, and laid thereon a bulky,
metal-bound volume.
"Now, in order," said Indbur, once more master of the situation, "to make this unauthorized
interview as short as possible, make your statement in the fewest possible words."
Ebling Mis said unhurriedly, "You know what I'm doing these days?"
"I have your reports here," replied the mayor, with satisfaction, "together with authorized
summaries of them. As I understand it, your investigations into the mathematics of
psychohistory have been intended to duplicate Hari Seldon's work and, eventually, trace the
projected course of future history, for the use of the Foundation."
"Exactly," said Mis, dryly. "When Seldon first established the Foundation, he was wise enough
to include no psychologists among the scientists placed here – so that the Foundation has
always worked blindly along the course of historical necessity. In the course of my researches, I
have based a good deal upon hints found at the Time Vault."
"I am aware of that, Mis. It is a waste of time to repeat."
"I'm not repeating," blared Mis, "because what I'm going to tell you isn't in any of those reports."
"How do you mean, not in the reports?" said Indbur, stupidly. "How could–"
"Ga-LAX-y, Let me tell this my own way, you offensive little creature. Stop putting words into
my mouth and questioning my every statement or I'll tramp out of here and let everything
crumble around you. Remember, you unprintable fool, the Foundation will come through
because it must, but if I walk out of here now – you won't."
Dashing his hat on the floor, so that clods of earth scattered, he sprang up the stairs of the dais
on which the wide desk stood and shoving papers violently, sat down upon a comer of it.
Indbur thought frantically of summoning the guard, or using the built-in blasters of his desk. But
Mis's face was glaring down upon him and there was nothing to do but cringe the best face
upon it.
"Dr. Mis," he began, with weak formality, "you must–"
"Shut up," said Mis, ferociously, "and listen. If this thing here," and his palm came down heavily
on the metal of the bound data, "is a mess of my reports – throw it out. Any report I write goes
up through some twenty-odd officials, gets to you, and then sort of winds down through twenty
more. That's fine if there's nothing you don't want kept secret. Well, I've got something
confidential here. It's so confidential, even the boys working for me haven't got wind of it. They
did the work, of course, but each just a little unconnected piece – and I put it together. You
know what the Time Vault is?"
Indbur nodded his head, but Mis went on with loud enjoyment of the situation, "Well, I'll tell you
anyhow because I've been sort of imagining this unprintable situation for a "Ga-LAX-y, of a long
time; I can read your mind, you puny fraud. You've got your hand right near a little knob that'll
call in about five hundred or so armed men to finish me off, but you're afraid of what I know –
you're afraid of a Seldon Crisis. Besides which, if you touch anything on your desk, I'll knock
your unprintable head off before anyone gets here. You and your bandit father and pirate
grandfather have been blood-sucking the Foundation long enough anyway."
"This is treason," gabbled Indbur.
"It certainly is," gloated Mis, "but what are you going to do about it? Let me tell you about the
Time Vault. That Time Vault is what Hari Seldon placed here at the beginning to help us over
the rough spots. For every crisis, Seldon has prepared a personal simulacrum to help – and
explain. Four crises so far – four appearances. The first time he appeared at the height of the
first crisis. The second time, he appeared at the moment just after the successful evolution of
the second crisis. Our ancestors were there to listen to him both times. At the third and fourth
crises, he was ignored – probably because he was not needed, but recent investigations – not
included in those reports you have – indicate that he appeared anyway, and at the proper
times. Get it?"
He did not wait for any answer. His cigar, a tattered, dead ruin was finally disposed of, a new
cigar groped for, and lit. The smoke puffed out violently.
He said, "Officially I've been trying to rebuild the science of psychohistory. Well, no one man is
going to do that, and it won't get done in any one century, either. But I've made advances in the
more simple elements and I've been able to use it as an excuse to meddle with the Time Vault.
What I have done, involves the determination, to a pretty fair kind of certainty, of the exact date
of the next appearance of Hari Seldon. I can give you the exact day, in other words, that the
coming Seldon Crisis, the fifth, will reach its climax. "
"How far off?" demanded Indbur, tensely.
And Mis exploded his bomb with cheerful nonchalance,
"Four months," he said. "Four unprintable months, less two days."
"Four months," said Indbur, with uncharacteristic vehemence. "Impossible."
"Impossible, my unprintable eye."
"Four months? Do you understand what that means? For a crisis to come to a head in four
months would mean that it has been preparing for years."
"And why not? Is there a law of Nature that requires the process to mature in the full light of
day?"
"But nothing impends. Nothing hangs over us." Indbur almost wrung his hands for anxiety. With
a sudden spasmodic recrudescence of ferocity, he screamed, "Will you get off my desk and let
me put it in order? How do you expect me to think?"
Mis, startled, lifted heavily and moved aside.
Indbur replaced objects in their appropriate niches with a feverish motion. He was speaking
quickly, "You have no right to come here like this. If you had presented your theory–"
"It is not a theory."
"I say it is a theory. If you had presented it together with your evidence and arguments, in
appropriate fashion, it would have gone to the Bureau of Historical Sciences. There it could
have been properly treated, the resulting analyses submitted to me, and then, of course, proper
action would have been taken. As it is, you've vexed me to no purpose. Ah, here it is."
He had a sheet of transparent, silvery paper in his hand which he shook at the bulbous
psychologist beside him.
"This is a short summary I prepare myself – weekly – of foreign matters in progress. Listen –
we have completed negotiations for a commercial treaty with Mores, continue negotiations for
one with Lyonesse, sent a delegation to some celebration or other on Bonde, received some
complaint or other from Kalgan and we've promised to look into it, protested some sharp trade
practices in Asperta and they've promised to look into it – and so on and so on." The mayor's
eyes swarmed down the list of coded notations, and then he carefully placed the sheet in its
proper place in the proper folder in the proper pigeonhole.
I tell you, Mis, there's not a thing there that breathes anything but order and peace–"
The door at the far, long end opened, and, in far too dramatically coincident a fashion to
suggest anything but real life, a plainly-costumed notable stepped in.
Indbur half-rose. He had the curiously swirling sensation of unreality that comes upon those
days when too much happens. After Mis's intrusion and wild fumings there now came the
equally improper, hence disturbing, intrusion unannounced, of his secretary, who at least knew
the rules.
The secretary kneeled low.
Indbur said, sharply, "Well!"
The secretary addressed the floor, "Excellence, Captain Han Pritcher of Information, returning
from Kalgan, in disobedience to your orders, has according to prior instructions – your order
X20-513 – been imprisoned, and awaits execution. Those accompanying him are being held for
questioning. A full report has been filed."
Indbur, in agony, said, "A full report has been received. Well!"
"Excellence, Captain Pritcher has reported, vaguely, dangerous designs on the part of the new
warlord of Kalgan. He has been given, according to prior instructions – your order X20-651 – no
formal hearing, but his remarks have been recorded and a full report filed."
Indbur screamed, "A full report has been received. Well!"
"Excellence, reports have within the quarter-hour been received from the Salinnian frontier.
Ships identified as Kalganian have been entering Foundation territory, unauthorized. The ships
are armed. Fighting has occurred."
The secretary was bent nearly double. Indbur remained standing. Ebling Mis shook himself,
clumped up to the secretary, and tapped him sharply on the shoulder.
"Here, you'd better have them release this Captain Pritcher, and have him sent here. Get out."
The secretary left, and Mis turned to the mayor, "Hadn't you better get the machinery moving,
Indbur? Four months, you know."
Indbur remained standing, glaze-eyed. Only one finger seemed alive – and it traced rapid jerky
triangles on the smooth desk top before him.
16. CONFERENCE
When the twenty-seven independent Trading worlds, united only by their distrust of the mother
planet of the Foundation, concert an assembly among themselves, and each is big with a pride
grown of its smallness, hardened by its own insularity and embittered by eternal danger – there
are preliminary negotiations to be overcome of a pettiness sufficiently staggering to heartsicken
the most persevering.
It is not enough to fix in advance such details as methods of voting, type of representation –
whether by world or by population. These are matters of involved political importance. It is not
enough to fix matters of priority at the table, both council and dinner, those are matters of
involved social importance.
It was the place of meeting – since that was a matter of overpowering provincialism. And in the
end the devious routes of diplomacy led to the world of Radole, which some commentators had
suggested at the start for logical reason of central position.
Radole was a small world – and, in military potential, perhaps the weakest of the twenty-seven.
That, by the way, was another factor in the logic of the choice.
It was a ribbon world – of which the Galaxy boasts sufficient, but among which, the inhabited
variety is a rarity for the physical requirements are difficult to meet. It was a world, in other
words, where the two halves face the monotonous extremes of heat and cold, while the region
of possible life is the girdling ribbon of the twilight zone.
Such a world invariably sounds uninviting to those who have not tried it, but there exist spots,
strategically placed – and Radole City was located in such a one.
It spread along the soft slopes of the foothills before the hacked-out mountains that backed it
along the rim of the cold hemisphere and held off the frightful ice. The warm, dry air of the
sun-half spilled over, and from the mountains was piped the water-and between the two,
Radole City became a continuous garden, swimming in the eternal morning of an eternal June.
Each house nestled among its flower garden, open to the fangless elements. Each garden was
a horticultural forcing ground, where luxury plants grew in fantastic patterns for the sake of the
foreign exchange they brought – until Radole had almost become a producing world, rather
than a typical Trading world.
So, in its way, Radole City was a little point of softness and luxury on a horrible planet – a tiny
scrap of Eden – and that, too, was a factor in the logic of the choice.
The strangers came from each of the twenty-six other Trading worlds: delegates, wives,
secretaries, newsmen, ships, and crews – and Radole's population nearly doubled and
Radole's resources strained themselves to the limit. One ate at will, and drank at will, and slept
not at all.
Yet there were few among the roisterers who were not intensely aware that all that volume of
the Galaxy burnt slowly in a sort of quiet, slumbrous war. And of those who were aware, there
were dime classes. First, there were the many who knew little and were very confident.
Such as the young space pilot who wore the Haven cockade on the clasp of his cap, and who
managed, in holding his glass before his eyes, to catch those of the faintly smiling Radolian girl
opposite. He was saying:
"We came fight through the war-zone to get here-on purpose. We traveled about a light-minute
or so, in neutral, right past Horleggor–"
"Horleggor?" broke in a long-legged native, who was playing host to that particular gathering.
"That's where the Mule got the guts beat out of him last week, wasn't it?"
"Where'd you hear that the Mule got the guts beat out of him?" demanded the pilot, loftily.
"Foundation radio."
"Yeah? Well, the Mule's got Horleggor. We almost ran into a convoy of his ships, and that's
where they were coming from. It isn't a gut-beating when you stay where you fought, and the
gut-beater leaves in a hurry."
Someone else said in a high, blurred voice, "Don't talk like that. Foundation always takes it on
the chin for a while. You watch; just sit tight and watch. Ol' Foundation knows when to come
back. And then – pow!" The thick voice concluded and was succeeded by a bleary grin.
"Anyway." said the pilot from Haven, after a short pause, "As I say, we saw the Mule's ships,
and they looked pretty good, pretty good. I tell you what – they looked new."
"New?" said the native, thoughtfully. "They build them themselves?" He broke a leaf from an
overhanging branch, sniffed delicately at it, then crunched it between his teeth, the bruised
tissues bleeding greenly and diffusing a minty odor. He said, "You trying to tell me they beat
Foundation ships with homebuilt jobs? Go on."
"We saw them, doc. And I can tell a ship from a comet, too, you know."
The native leaned close. "You know what I think. Listen, don't kid yourself. Wars don't just start
by themselves, and we have a bunch of shrewd apples running things. They know what they're
doing."
The well-unthirsted one said with sudden loudness, "You watch ol' Foundation. They wait for
the last minute, then – pow!" He grinned with vacuously open mouth at the girl, who moved
away from him.
The Radolian was saying, "For instance, old man, you think maybe that this Mule guy's running
things. No-o-o." And he wagged a finger horizontally. "The way I hear it, and from pretty high
up, mind you, he's our boy. We're paying him off, and we probably built those ships. Let's be
realistic about it – we probably did. Sure, he can't beat the Foundation in the long run, but he
can get them shaky, and when he does – we get in."
The girl said, "Is that all you can talk about, Klev? The war? You make me tired."
The pilot from Haven said, in an access of gallantry,
"Change the subject. Can't make the girls tired."
The bedewed one took up the refrain and banged a mug to the rhythm. The little groups of two
that had formed broke up with giggles and swagger, and a few similar groups of twos emerged
from the sun-house in the background.
The conversation became more general, more varied, more meaningless.
Then there were those who knew a little more and were less confident.
Such as the one-armed Fran, whose large bulk represented Haven as official delegated, and
who lived high in consequence, and cultivated new friendships – with women when he could
and with men when he had to.
It was on the sun platform of the hilltop home, of one of these new friends, that he relaxed for
the first of what eventually proved to be a total of two times while on Radole. The new friend
was Iwo Lyon, a kindred soul of Radole. Iwo's house was apart from the general cluster,
apparently alone in a sea of floral perfume and insect chatter. The sun platform was a grassy
strip of lawn set at a forty-five degree angle, and upon it Fran stretched out and fairly sopped
up sun.
He said, "Don't have anything like this on Haven."
Iwo replied, sleepily, "Ever seen the cold side. There's a spot twenty miles from here where the
oxygen runs like water. "
"Go on.
"Fact."
"Well, I'll tell you, Iwo-In the old days before my arm was chewed off I knocked around, see –
and you won't believe this, but" – The story that followed lasted considerably, and Iwo didn't
believe it.
Iwo said, through yawns, "They don't make them like in the old days, that's the truth."
"No, guess they don't. Well, now," Fran fired up, "don't say that. I told you about my son, didn't
I? He's one of the old school, if you like. He'll make a great Trader, blast it. He's his old man up
and down. Up and down, except that he gets married."
"You mean legal contract? With a girl?"
"That's right. Don't see the sense in it myself. They went to Kalgan for their honeymoon."
"Kalgan? Kalgan? When the Galaxy was this?"
Fran smiled broadly, and said with slow meaning, "Just before the Mule declared war on the
Foundation."
"That so?"
Fran nodded and motioned Iwo closer with his head. He said, hoarsely, "In fact, I can tell you
something, if you don't let it go any further. My boy was sent to Kalgan for a purpose. Now I
wouldn't like to let it out, you know, just what the purpose was, naturally, but you look at the
situation now, and I suppose you can make a pretty good guess. In any case, my boy was the
man for the job. We Traders needed some sort of ruckus." He smiled, craftily. "It's here. I'm not
saying how we did it, but – my boy went to Kalgan, and the Mule sent out his ships. My son!"
Iwo was duly impressed. He grew confidential in his turn, "That's good. You know, they say
we've got five hundred ships ready to pitch in on our own at the right time. "
Fran said authoritatively, "More than that, maybe. This is real strategy. This is the kind I like."
He clawed loudly at the skin of his abdomen. "But don't you forget that the Mule is a smart boy,
too. What happened at Horleggor worries me."
"I heard he lost about ten ships."
"Sure, but he had a hundred more, and the Foundation had to get out. It's all to the good to
have those tyrants beaten, but not as quickly as all that." He shook his head.
"The question I ask is where does the Mule get his ships? There's a widespread rumor we're
making them for him."
"We? The Traders? Haven has the biggest ship factories anywhere in the independent worlds,
and we haven't made one for anyone but ourselves. Do you suppose any world is building a
fleet for the Mule on its own, without taking the precaution of united action? That's a ... a fairy
tale."
"Well, where does he get them?"
And Fran shrugged, "Makes them himself, I suppose. That worries me, too."
Fran blinked at the sun and curled his toes about the smooth wood of the polished foot-rest.
Slowly, he fell asleep and the soft burr of his breathing mingled with the insect sibilance.
Lastly, there were the very few who knew considerable and were not confident at all.
Such as Randu, who on the fifth day of the all-Trader convention entered the Central Hall and
found the two men he had asked to be there, waiting for him. The five hundred seats were
empty – and were going to stay so.
Randu said quickly, almost before he sat down, "We three represent about half the military
potential of the Independent Trading Worlds."
"Yes," said Mangin of Iss, "my colleague and I have already commented upon the fact."
"I am ready," said Randu, "to speak quickly and earnestly. I am not interested in bargaining or
subtlety. Our position is radically in the worse."
"As a result of–" urged Ovall Gri of Mnemon.
"Of developments of the last hour. Please! From the beginning. First, our position is not of our
doing, and but doubtfully of our control. Our original dealings were not with the Mule, but with
several others; notably the ex-warlord of Kalgan, whom the Mule defeated at a most
inconvenient time for us."
"Yes, but this Mule is a worthy substitute," said Mangin. "I do not cavil at details."
"You may when you know all the details." Randu leaned forward and placed his hands upon the
table palms-up in an obvious gesture.
He said, "A month ago I sent my nephew and my nephew's wife to Kalgan."
"Your nephew!" cried Ovall Gri, in surprise. "I did not know he was your nephew."
"With what purpose," asked Mangin, dryly. "This?" And his thumb drew an inclusive circle high
in the air.
"No. If you mean the Mule's war on the Foundation, no. How could I aim so high? The young
man knew nothing – neither of our organization nor of our aims. He was told I was a minor
member of an intra-Haven patriotic society, and his function at Kalgan was nothing but that of
an amateur observer. My motives were, I must admit, rather obscure. Mainly, I was curious
about the Mule. He is a strange phenomenon – but that's a chewed cud; I'll not go into it.
Secondly, it would make an interesting and educational training project for a man who had
experience with the Foundation and the Foundation underground and showed promise of future
usefulness to us. You see–"
Ovall's long face fell into vertical lines as he showed his large teeth, "You must have been
surprised at the outcome, then, since there is not a world among the Traders, I believe, that
does not know that this nephew of yours abducted a Mule underling in the name of the
Foundation and furnished the Mule with a casus belli. Galaxy, Randu, you spin romances. I find
it hard to believe you had no hand in that. Come, it was a skillful job."
Randu shook his white head, "Not of my doing. Nor, willfully, of my nephew's, who is now held
prisoner at the Foundation, and may not live to see the completion of this so-skillful job. I have
just heard from him. The Personal Capsule has been smuggled out somehow, come through
the war zone, gone to Haven, and traveled from there to here. It has been a month on its
travels."
"And?–"
Randu leaned a heavy hand upon the heel of his palm and said, sadly, "I'm afraid we are cast
for the same role that the onetime warlord of Kalgan played. The Mule is a mutant!"
There was a momentary qualm; a faint impression of quickened heartbeats. Randu might easily
have imagined it.
When Mangin spoke, the evenness of his voice was unchanged, "How do you know?"
"Only because my nephew says so, but he was on Kalgan.
"What kind of a mutant? There are all kinds, you know."
Randu forced the rising impatience down, "All kinds of mutants, yes, Mangin. All kinds! But only
one kind of Mule. What kind of a mutant would start as an unknown, assemble an army,
establish, they say, a five-mile asteroid as original base, capture a planet, then a system, then
a region – and then attack the Foundation, and defeat them at Horleggor. And all in two or
three years!"
Ovall Gri shrugged, "So you think he'll beat the Foundation?"
"I don't know. Suppose he does?"
"Sorry, I can't go that far. You don't beat the Foundation. Look, there's not a new fact we have
to go on except for the statements of a ... well, of an inexperienced boy. Suppose we shelve it
for a while. With all the Mule's victories, we weren't worried until now, and unless he goes a
good deal further than he has, I see no reason to change that. Yes?"
Randu frowned and despaired at the cobweb texture of his argument. He said to both, "Have
we yet made any contact with the Mule?"
"No," both answered.
"It's true, though, that we've tried, isn't it? It's true that there's not much purpose to our meeting
unless we do reach him, isn't it? It's true that so far there's been more drinking than thinking,
and more wooing than doing – I quote from an editorial in today's Radole Tribune – and all
because we can't reach the Mule. Gentlemen, we have nearly a thousand ships waiting to be
thrown into the fight at the proper moment to seize control of the Foundation. I say we should
change that. I say, throw those thousand onto the board now – against the Mule."
"You mean for the Tyrant Indbur and the bloodsuckers of the Foundation?" demanded Mangin,
with quiet venom.
Randu raised a weary hand, "Spare me the adjectives. Against the Mule, I say, and for
I-don't-care-who."
Ovall Gri rose, "Randu, I'll have nothing to do with that, You present it to the full council tonight
if you particularly hunger for political suicide."
He left without another word and Mangin followed silently, leaving Randu to drag out a lonely
hour of endless, insoluble consideration.
At the full council that night, he said nothing.
But it was Ovall Gri who pushed into his room the next morning; an Ovall Gri only sketchily
dressed and who had neither shaved nor combed his hair.
Randu stared at him over a yet-uncleared breakfast table with an astonishment sufficiently
open and strenuous to cause him to drop his pipe.
Ovall said baldly, harshly. "Mnemon has been bombarded from space by treacherous attack."
Randu's eyes narrowed, "The Foundation?"
"The Mule!" exploded Ovall. "The Mule!" His words raced, "It was unprovoked and deliberate.
Most of our fleet had joined the international flotilla. The few left as Home Squadron were
insufficient and were blown out of the sky. There have been no landings yet, and there may not
be, for half the attackers are reported destroyed – but it is war – and I have come to ask how
Haven stands on the matter."
"Haven, I am sure, will adhere to the spirit of the Charter of Federation. But, you see? He
attacks us as well."
"This Mule is a madman. Can he defeat the universe?" He faltered and sat down to seize
Randu's wrist, "Our few survivors have reported the Mule's poss ... enemy's possession of a
new weapon. A nuclear-field depressor."
"A what?"
Ovall said, "Most of our ships were lost because their nuclear weapons failed them. It could not
have happened by either accident or sabotage. It must have been a weapon of the Mule. It
didn't work perfectly; the effect was intermittent; there were ways to neutralize – my dispatches
are not detailed. But you see that such a tool would change the nature of war and, possibly,
make our entire fleet obsolete."
Randu felt an old, old man. His face sagged hopelessly, "I am afraid a monster is grown that
will devour all of us. Yet we must fight him."
17. THE VISI-SONOR
Ebling Mis's house in a not-so-pretentious neighborhood of Terminus City was well known to
the intelligentsia, literati, and just-plain-well-read of the Foundation. Its notable characteristics
depended, subjectively, upon the source material that was read. To a thoughtful biographer, it
was the "symbolization of a retreat from a nonacademic reality," a society columnist gushed
silkily at its "frightfully masculine atmosphere of careless disorder," a University Ph.D. called it
brusquely, "bookish, but unorganized," a nonuniversity friend said, "good for a drink anytime
and you can put your feet on the sofa," and a breezy newsweekly broadcast, that went in for
color, spoke of the "rocky, down-to-earth, no-nonsense living quarters of blaspheming, Leftish,
balding Ebling Mis."
To Bayta, who thought for no audience but herself at the moment, and who had the advantage
of first-hand information, it was merely sloppy.
Except for the first few days, her imprisonment had been a light burden. Far lighter, it seemed,
that this half-hour wait in the psychologist's home – under secret observation, perhaps? She
had been with Toran then, at least.
Perhaps she might have grown wearier of the strain, had not Magnifico's long nose drooped in
a gesture that plainly showed his own far greater tension.
Magnifico's pipe-stem legs were folded up under a pointed, sagging chin, as if he were trying to
huddle himself into disappearance, and Bayta's hand went out in a gentle and automatic
gesture of reassurance. Magnifico winced, then smiled.
"Surely, my lady, it would seem that even yet my body denies the knowledge of my mind and
expects of others' hands a blow."
"There's no need for worry, Magnifico. I'm with you, and I won't let anyone hurt you."
The clown's eyes sidled towards her, then drew away quickly. "But they kept me away from you
earlier – and from your kind husband – and, on my word, you may laugh, but I was lonely for
missing friendship."
"I wouldn't laugh at that. I was, too."
The clown brightened, and he hugged his knees closer. He said, "You have not met this man
who will see us?" It was a cautious question.
"No. But he is a famous man. I have seen him in the newscasts and heard quite a good deal of
him. I think he's a good man, Magnifico, who means us no harm."
"Yes?" The clown stirred uneasily. "That may be, my lady, but he has questioned me before,
and his manner is of an abruptness and loudness that bequivers me. He is full of strange
words, so that the answers to his questions could not worm out of my throat. Almost, I might
believe the romancer who once played on my ignorance with a tale that, at such moments, the
heart lodged in the windpipe and prevented speech."
"But it's different now. We're two to his one, and he won't be able to frighten the both of us, will
he?"
"No, my lady."
A door slammed somewheres, and the roaring of a voice entered the house. Just outside the
room, it coagulated into words with a fierce, "Get the "Ga-LAX-y out of here!" and two
uniformed guards were momentarily visible through the opening door, in quick retreat.
Ebling Mis entered frowning, deposited a carefully wrapped bundle on the floor, and
approached to shake Bayta's hand with careless pressure. Bayta returned it vigorously,
man-fashion. Mis did a double-take as he turned to the clown, and favored the girl with a longer
look.
He said, "Married?"
"Yes. We went through the legal formalities."
Mis paused. Then, "Happy about it?"
"So far."
Mis shrugged, and turned again to Magnifico. He unwrapped the package, "Know what this is,
boy?"
Magnifico fairly hurled himself out of his seat and caught the multi-keyed instrument. He
fingered the myriad knobby contacts and threw a sudden back somersault of joy, to the
imminent destruction of the nearby furniture.
He croaked, "A Visi-Sonor – and of a make to distill joy out of a dead man's heart." His long
fingers caressed softly and slowly, pressing lightly on contacts with a rippling motion, resting
momentarily on one key then another – and in the air before them there was a soft glowing
rosiness, just inside the range of vision.
Ebling Mis said, "All right, boy, you said you could pound on one of those gadgets, and there's
your chance. You'd better tune it, though. It's out of a museum." Then, in an aside to Bayta,
"Near as I can make it, no one on the Foundation can make it talk right."
He leaned closer and said quickly, "The clown won't talk without you. Will you help?"
She nodded.
"Good!" he said. "His state of fear is almost fixed, and I doubt that his mental strength would
possibly stand a psychic probe. If I'm to get anything out of him otherwise, he's got to feel
absolutely at ease. You understand?"
She nodded again.
"This Visi-Sonor is the first step in the process. He says he can play it; and his reaction now
makes it pretty certain that it's one of the great joys of his life. So whether the playing is good or
bad, be interested and appreciative. Then exhibit friendliness and confidence in me. Above all,
follow my lead in everything." There was a swift glance at Magnifico, huddled in a comer of the
sofa, making rapid adjustments in the interior of the instrument. He was completely absorbed.
Mis said in a conversational tone to Bayta, "Ever hear a Visi-Sonor?"
"Once," said Bayta, equally casually, "at a concert of rare instruments. I wasn't impressed."
"Well, I doubt that you came across good playing. There are very few really good players. It's
not so much that it requires physical co-ordination – a multi-bank piano requires more, for
instance – as a certain type of free-wheeling mentality." In a lower voice, "That's why our living
skeleton there might be better than we think. More often than not, good players are idiots
otherwise. It's one of those queer setups that makes psychology interesting."
He added, in a patent effort to manufacture light conversation, "You know how the beblistered
thing works? I looked it up for this purpose, and all I've made out so far is that its radiations
stimulate the optic center of the brain directly, without ever touching the optic nerve. It's actually
the utilization of a sense never met with in ordinary nature. Remarkable, when you come to
think of it. What you hear is all right. That's ordinary. Eardrum, cochlea, all that. But – Shh! He's
ready. Will you kick that switch. It works better in the dark."
In the darkness, Magnifico was a mere blob, Ebling Mis a heavy-breathing mass. Bayta found
herself straining her eyes anxiously, and at first with no effect. There was a thin, reedy quaver
in the air, that wavered raggedly up the scale. It hovered, dropped and caught itself, gained in
body, and swooped into a booming crash that had the effect of a thunderous split in a veiling
curtain.
A little globe of pulsing color grew in rhythmic spurts and burst in midair into formless gouts that
swirled high and came down as curving streamers in interfacing patterns. They coalesced into
little spheres, no two alike in color – and Bayta began discovering things.
She noticed that closing her eyes made the color pattern all the clearer; that each little
movement of color had its own little pattern of sound; that she could not identify the colors; and,
lastly, that the globes were not globes but little figures.
Little figures; little shifting flames, that danced and flickered in their myriads; that dropped out of
sight and returned from nowhere; that whipped about one another and coalesced then into a
new color.
Incongruously, Bayta thought of the little blobs of color that come at night when you close your
eyelids till they hurt, and stare patiently. There was the old familiar effect of the marching polka
dots of shifting color, of the contracting concentric circles, of the shapeless masses that quiver
momentarily. All that, larger, multivaried – and each little dot of color a tiny figure.
They darted at her in pairs, and she lifted her hands with a sudden gasp, but they tumbled and
for an instant she was the center of a brilliant snowstorm, while cold light slipped off her
shoulders and down her arm in a luminous ski-slide, shooting off her stiff fingers and meeting
slowly in a shining midair focus. Beneath it all, the sound of a hundred instruments flowed in
liquid streams until she could not tell it from the light.
She wondered if Ebling Mis were seeing the same thing, and if not, what he did see, The
wonder passed, and then–
She was watching again. The little figures-were they little figures? –little tiny women with
burning hair that turned and bent too quickly for the mind to focus? –seized one another in
star-shaped groups that turned – and the music was faint laughter – girls' laughter that began
inside the ear.
The stars drew together, sparked towards one another, grew slowly into structure – and from
below, a palace shot upward in rapid evolution. Each brick a tiny color, each color a tiny spark,
each spark a stabbing light that shifted patterns and led the eye skyward to twenty jeweled
minarets.
A glittering carpet shot out and about, whirling, spinning an insubstantial web that engulfed all
space, and from it luminous shoots stabbed upward and branched into trees that sang with a
music all their own.
Bayta sat inclosed in it. The music welled about her in rapid, lyrical flights. She reached out to
touch a fragile tree and blossoming spicules floated downwards and faded, each with its clear,
tiny tinkle.
The music crashed in twenty cymbals, and before her an area flamed up in a spout and
cascaded down invisible steps into Bayta's lap, where it spilled over and flowed in rapid current,
raising the fiery sparkle to her waist, while across her lap was a rainbow bridge and upon it the
little figures–
A palace, and a garden, and tiny men and women on a bridge, stretching out as far as she
could see, swimming through the stately swells of stringed music converging in upon her–
And then – there seemed a frightened pause, a hesitant, indrawn motion, a swift collapse. The
colors fled, spun into a globe that shrank, and rose, and disappeared.
And it was merely dark again.
A heavy foot scratched for the pedal, reached it, and the light flooded in; the flat light of a prosy
sun. Bayta blinked until the tears came, as though for the longing of what was gone. Ebling Mis
was a podgy inertness with his eyes still round and his mouth still open.
Only Magnifico himself was alive, and he fondled his Visi-Sonor in a crooning ecstasy.
"My lady," he gasped, "it is indeed of an effect the most magical. It is of balance and response
almost beyond hope in its delicacy and stability. On this, it would seem I could work wonders.
How liked you my composition, my lady?"
"Was it yours?" breathed Bayta. "Your own?"
At her awe, his thin face turned a glowing red to the tip of his mighty nose. "My very own, my
lady. The Mule liked it not, but often and often I have played it for my own amusement. It was
once, in my youth, that I saw the palace – a gigantic place of jeweled riches that I saw from a
distance at a time of high carnival. There were people of a splendor undreamed of – and
magnificence more than ever I saw afterwards, even in the Mule's service. It is but a poor
makeshift I have created, but my mind's poverty precludes more. I call it, 'The Memory of
Heaven.'"
Now through the midst of the chatter, Mis shook himself to active life. "Here," he said, "here,
Magnifico, would you like to do that same thing for others?"
For a moment, the clown drew back. "For others?" he quavered.
"For thousands," cried Mis, "in the great Halls of the Foundation. Would you like to be your own
master, and honored by all, wealthy, and ... and–" his imagination failed him. "And all that? Eh?
What do you say?"
"But how may I be all that, mighty sir, for indeed I am but a poor clown ungiven to the great
things of the world?"
The psychologist puffed out his lips, and passed the back of his hand across his brow. He said,
"But your playing, man. The world is yours if you would play so for the mayor and his Trading
Trusts. Wouldn't you like that?"
The clown glanced briefly at Bayta, "Would she stay with me?"
Bayta laughed, "Of course, silly. Would it be likely that I'd leave you now that you're on the point
of becoming rich and famous?"
"It would all be yours," he replied earnestly, "and surely the wealth of Galaxy itself would be
yours before I could repay my debt to your kindness."
"But," said Mis, casually, "if you would first help me–"
"What is that?"
The psychologist paused, and smiled, "A little surface probe that doesn't hurt. It wouldn't touch
but the peel of your brain."
There was a flare of deadly fear in Magnifico's eyes. "Not a probe. I have seen it used. It drains
the mind and leaves an empty skull. The Mule did use it upon traitors and let them wander
mindless through the streets, until out of mercy, they were killed." He held up his hand to push
Mis away.
"That was a psychic probe," explained Mis, patiently, "and even that would only harm a person
when misused. This probe I have is a surface probe that wouldn't hurt a baby. "
"That's right, Magnifico," urged Bayta. "It's only to help beat the Mule and keep him far away.
Once that's done, you and I will be rich and famous all our lives."
Magnifico held out a trembling hand, "Will you hold my hand, then?"
Bayta took it in both her own, and the clown watched the approach of the burnished terminal
plates with large eyes.
Ebling Mis rested carelessly on the too-lavish chair in Mayor Indbur's private quarters,
unregenerately unthankful for the condescension shown him and watched the small mayor's
fidgeting unsympathetically. He tossed away a cigar stub and spat out a shred of tobacco.
"And, incidentally, if you want something for your next concert at Mallow Hall, Indbur," he said,
"you can dump out those electronic gadgeteers into the sewers they came from and have this
little freak play the Visi-Sonor for you. Indbur – it's out of this world."
Indbur said peevishly, "I did not call you here to listen to your lectures on music. What of the
Mule? Tell me that. What of the Mule?"
"The Mule? Well, I'll tell you – I used a surface probe and got little. Can't use the psychic probe
because the freak is scared blind of it, so that his resistance will probably blow his unprintable
mental fuses as soon as contact is made. But this is what I've got, if you'll just stop tapping your
fingernails–
"First place, de-stress the Mule's physical strength. He's probably strong, but most of the freak's
fairy tales about it are probably considerably blown up by his own fearful memory, He wears
queer glasses and his eyes kill, he evidently has mental powers."
"So much we had at the start," commented the mayor, sourly.
"Then the probe confirms it, and from there on I've been working mathematically."
"So? And how long will all this take? Your word-rattling will deafen me yet."
"About a month, I should say, and I may have something for you. And I may not, of course. But
what of it? If this is all outside Seldon's plans, our chances are precious little, unprintable little."
Indbur whirled on the psychologist fiercely, "Now I have you, traitor. Lie! Say you're not one of
these criminal rumormongers that are spreading defeatism and panic through the Foundation,
and making my work doubly hard."
"I? I?" Mis gathered anger slowly.
Indbur swore at him, "Because by the dust-clouds of space, the Foundation will win – the
Foundation must win."
"Despite the loss at Horleggor?"
"It was not a loss. You have swallowed that spreading lie, too? We were outnumbered and
betreasoned–"
"By whom?" demanded Mis, contemptuously.
"By the lice-ridden democrats of the gutter," shouted Indbur back at him. "I have known for long
that the fleet has been riddled by democratic cells. Most have been wiped out, but enough
remain for the unexplained surrender of twenty ships in the thickest of the swarming fight.
Enough to force an apparent defeat.
"For that matter, my rough-tongued, simple patriot and epitome of the primitive virtues, what are
your own connections with the democrats?"
Ebling Mis shrugged it off, "You rave, do you know that? What of the retreat since, and the loss
of half of Siwenna? Democrats again?"
"No. Not democrats," the little man smiled sharply. "We retreat – as the Foundation has always
retreated under attack, until the inevitable march of history turns with us. Already, I see the
outcome. Already, the so-called underground of the democrats has issued manifestoes
swearing aid and allegiance to the Government. It could be a feint, a cover for a deeper
treachery, but I make good use of it, and the propaganda distilled from it will have its effect,
whatever the crawling traitors scheme. And better than that–"
"Even better than that, Indbur?"
"Judge for yourself. Two days ago, the so-called Association of Independent Traders declared
war on the Mule, and the Foundation fleet is strengthened, at a stroke, by a thousand ships.
You see, this Mule goes too far. He finds us divided and quarreling among ourselves and under
the pressure of his attack we unite and grow strong. He must lose. It is inevitable – as always."
Mis still exuded skepticism, "Then you tell me that Seldon planned even for the fortuitous
occurrence of a mutant."
"A mutant! I can't tell him from a human, nor could you but for the ravings of a rebel captain,
some outland youngsters, and an addled juggler and clown. You forget the most conclusive
evidence of all – your own."
"My own?" For just a moment, Mis was startled.
"Your own," sneered the mayor. "The Time Vault opens in nine weeks. What of that? It opens
for a crisis. If this attack of the Mule is not the crisis, where is the 'real' one, the one the Vault is
opening for? Answer me, you lardish ball."
The psychologist shrugged, "All tight. If it keeps you happy. Do me a favor, though. Just in case
... just in case old Seldon makes his speech and it does go sour, suppose you let me attend the
Grand Opening."
"All right. Get out of here. And stay out of my sight for nine weeks."
"With unprintable pleasure, you wizened horror," muttered Mis to himself as he left.
18. FALL OF THE FOUNDATION
There was an atmosphere about the Time Vault that just missed definition in several directions
at once. It was not one of decay, for it was well-lit and well-conditioned, with the color scheme
of the walls lively, and the rows of fixed chairs comfortable and apparently designed for eternal
use. It was not even ancient, for three centuries had left no obvious mark. There was certainly
no effort at the creation of awe or reverence, for the appointments were simple and everyday –
next door to bareness, in fact.
Yet after all the negatives were added and the sum disposed of, something was left – and that
something centered about the glass cubicle that dominated half the room with its clear
emptiness. Four times in three centuries, the living simulacrum of Hari Seldon himself had sat
there and spoken. Twice he had spoken to no audience.
Through three centuries and nine generations, the old man who had seen the great days of
universal empire projected himself – and still he understood more of the Galaxy of his
great-ultra-great-grandchildren, than did those grandchildren themselves.
Patiently that empty cubicle waited.
The first to arrive was Mayor Indbur III, driving his ceremonial ground car through the hushed
and anxious streets. Arriving with him was his own chair, higher than those that belonged there,
and wider. It was placed before all the others, and Indbur dominated all but the empty
glassiness before him.
The solemn official at his left bowed a reverent head. "Excellence, arrangements are completed
for the widest possible sub-etheric spread for the official announcement by your excellence
tonight."
"Good. Meanwhile, special interplanetary programs concerning the Time Vault are to continue.
There will, of course, be no predictions or speculations of any sort on the subject. Does popular
reaction continue satisfactory?"
"Excellence, very much so. The vicious rumors prevailing of late have decreased further.
Confidence is widespread."
"Good!" He gestured the man away and adjusted his elaborate neckpiece to a nicety.
It was twenty minutes of noon!
A select group of the great props of the mayoralty – the leaders of the great Trading
organizations – appeared in ones and twos with the degree of pomp appropriate to their
financial status and place in mayoral favor. Each presented himself to the mayor, received a
gracious word or two, took an assigned seat.
Somewhere, incongruous among the stilted ceremony of all this, Randu of Haven made his
appearance and wormed his way unannounced to the mayor's seat.
"Excellence!" he muttered, and bowed.
Indbur frowned. "You have not been granted an audience. "
"Excellence, I have requested one for a week."
"I regret that the matters of State involved in the appearance of Seldon have–"
"Excellence, I regret them, too, but I must ask you to rescind your order that the ships of the
Independent Traders be distributed among the fleets of the Foundation."
Indbur had flushed red at the interruption. "This is not the time for discussion."
"Excellence, it is the only time," Randu whispered urgently. "As representative of the
Independent Trading Worlds, I tell you such a move can not be obeyed. It must be rescinded
before Seldon solves our problem for us. Once the emergency is passed, it will be too late to
conciliate and our alliance will melt away."
Indbur stared at Randu coldly. "You realize that I am head of the Foundation armed forces?
Have I the right to determine military policy or have I not?"
"Excellence, you have, but some things are inexpedient."
"I recognize no inexpediency. It is dangerous to allow your people separate fleets in this
emergency. Divided action plays into the hands of the enemy. We must unite, ambassador,
militarily as well as politically."
Randu felt his throat muscles tighten. He omitted the courtesy of the opening title. "You feet
safe now that Seldon will speak, and you move against us. A month ago you were soft and
yielding, when our ships defeated the Mule at Terel. I might remind you, sir, that it is the
Foundation Fleet that has been defeated in open battle five times, and that the ships of the
Independent Trading Worlds have won your victories for you."
Indbur frowned dangerously, "You are no longer welcome upon Terminus, ambassador. Your
return will be requested this evening. Furthermore, your connection with subversive democratic
forces on Terminus will be – and has been – investigated."
Randu replied, "When I leave, our ships will go with me. I know nothing of your democrats. I
know only that your Foundation's ships have surrendered to the Mule by the treason of their
high officers, not their sailors, democratic or otherwise. I tell you that twenty ships of the
Foundation surrendered at Horleggor at the orders of their rear admiral, when they were
unharmed and unbeaten. The rear admiral was your own close associate – he presided at the
trial of my nephew when he first arrived from Kalgan. It is not the only case we know of and our
ships and men will not be risked under potential traitors.
Indbur said, "You will be placed under guard upon leaving here."
Randu walked away under the silent stares of the contemptuous coterie of the rulers of
Terminus.
It was ten minutes of twelve!
Bayta and Toran had already arrived. They rose in their back seats and beckoned to Randu as
he passed.
Randu smiled gently, "You are here after all. How did you work it?"
"Magnifico was our politician," grinned Toran. "Indbur insists upon his Visi-Sonor composition
based on the Time Vault, with himself, no doubt, as hero. Magnifico refused to attend without
us, and there was no arguing him out of it. Ebling Mis is with us, or was. He's wandering about
somewhere." Then, with a sudden access of anxious gravity, "Why, what's wrong, uncle? You
don't look well."
Randu nodded, "I suppose not. We're in for bad times, Toran. When the Mule is disposed of,
our turn will come, I'm afraid. "
A straight solemn figure in white approached, and greeted them with a stiff bow.
Bayta's dark eyes smiled, as she held out her hand, "Captain Pritcher! Are you on space duty
then?"
The captain took the hand and bowed lower, "Nothing like it. Dr. Mis, I understand, has been
instrumental in bringing me here, but it's only temporary. Back to home guard tomorrow. What
time is it?"
It was three minutes of twelve!
Magnifico was the picture of misery and heartsick depression. His body curled up, in his eternal
effort at self-effacement. His long nose was pinched at the nostrils and his large, down-slanted
eyes darted uneasily about.
He clutched at Bayta's hand, and when she bent down, he whispered, "Do you suppose, my
lady, that all these great ones were in the audience, perhaps, when I ... when I played the
Visi-Sonor?"
"Everyone, I'm sure," Bayta assured him, and shook him gently. "And I'm sure they all think
you're the most wonderful player in the Galaxy and that your concert was the greatest ever
seen, so you just straighten yourself and sit correctly. We must have dignity."
He smiled feebly at her mock-frown and unfolded his long-boned limbs slowly.
It was noon – and the glass cubicle was no longer empty.
It was doubtful that anyone had witnessed the appearance. It was a clean break; one moment
not there and the next moment there.
In the cubicle was a figure in a wheelchair, old and shrunken, from whose wrinkled face bright
eyes shone, and whose voice, as it turned out, was the livest thing about him. A book lay face
downward in his lap, and the voice came softly.
"I am Hari Seldon!"
He spoke through a silence, thunderous in its intensity.
"I am Hari Seldon! I do not know if anyone is here at all by mere sense-perception but that is
unimportant. I have few fears as yet of a breakdown in the Plan. For the first three centuries the
percentage probability of nondeviation is nine-four point two."
He paused to smile, and then said genially, "By the way, if any of you are standing, you may sit.
If any would like to smoke, please do. I am not here in the flesh. I require no ceremony.
"Let us take up the problem of the moment, then. For the first time, the Foundation has been
faced, or perhaps, is in the last stages of facing, civil war. Till now, the attacks from without
have been adequately beaten off, and inevitably so, according to the strict laws of
psychohistory. The attack at present is that of a too-undisciplined outer group of the Foundation
against the too-authoritarian central government. The procedure was necessary, the result
obvious."
The dignity of the high-born audience was beginning to break. Indbur was half out of his chair.
Bayta leaned forward with troubled eyes. What was the great Seldon talking about? She had
missed a few of the words–
"–that the compromise worked out is necessary in two respects. The revolt of the Independent
Traders introduces an element of new uncertainty in a government perhaps grown
over-confident. The element of striving is restored. Although beaten, a healthy increase of
democracy–"
There were raised voices now. Whispers had ascended the scale of loudness, and the edge of
panic was in them.
Bayta said in Toran's ear, "Why doesn't he talk about the Mule? The Traders never revolted."
Toran shrugged his shoulders.
The seated figure spoke cheerfully across and through the increasing disorganization:
"–a new and firmer coalition government was the necessary and beneficial outcome of the
logical civil war forced upon the Foundation. And now only the remnants of the old Empire
stand in the way of further expansion, and in them, for the next few years, at any rate, is no
problem. Of course, I can not reveal the nature of the next prob–"
In the complete uproar, Seldon's lips moved soundlessly.
Ebling Mis was next to Randu, face ruddy. He was shouting. "Seldon is off his rocker. He's got
the wrong crisis. Were your Traders ever planning civil war?"
Randu said thinly, "We planned one, yes. We called it off in the face of the Mule."
"Then the Mule is an added feature, unprepared for in Seldon's psychohistory. Now what's
happened?"
In the sudden, frozen silence, Bayta found the cubicle once again empty. The nuclear glow of
the walls was dead, the soft current of conditioned air absent.
Somewhere the sound of a shrill siren was rising and falling in the scale and Randu formed the
words with his lips, "Space raid!"
And Ebling Mis held his wrist watch to his ears and shouted suddenly, "Stopped, by the
"Ga-LAX-y, is there a watch in the room that is going?" His voice was a roar.
Twenty wrists went to twenty ears. And in far less than twenty seconds, it was quite certain that
none were.
"Then," said Mis, with a grim and horrible finality, "something has stopped all nuclear power in
the Time Vault – and the Mule is attacking."
Indbur's wail rose high above the noise, "Take your seats! The Mule is fifty parsecs distant."
"He was," shouted back Mis, "a week ago. Right now, Terminus is being bombarded."
Bayta felt a deep depression settle softly upon her. She felt its folds tighten close and thick,
until her breath forced its way only with pain past her tightened throat.
The outer noise of a gathering crowd was evident. The doors were thrown open and a harried
figure entered, and spoke rapidly to Indbur, who had rushed to him.
"Excellence," he whispered, "not a vehicle is running in the city, not a communication line to the
outside is open.
The Tenth Fleet is reported defeated and the Mule's ships are outside the atmosphere. The
general staff–"
Indbur crumpled, and was a collapsed figure of impotence upon the floor. In all that hall, not a
voice was raised now. Even the growing crowd without was fearful, but silent, and the horror of
cold panic hovered dangerously.
Indbur was raised. Wine was held to his lips. His lips moved before his eyes opened, and the
word they formed was, "Surrender!"
Bayta found herself near to crying – not for sorrow or humiliation, but simply and plainly out of a
vast frightened despair. Ebling Mis plucked at her sleeve. "Come, young lady–"
She was pulled out of her chair, bodily.
"We're leaving," he said, "and take your musician with you." The plump scientist's lips were
trembling and colorless.
"Magnifico," said Bayta, faintly. The clown shrank in horror. His eyes were glassy.
"The Mule," he shrieked. "The Mule is coming for me."
He thrashed wildly at her touch. Toran leaned over and brought his fist up sharply. Magnifico
slumped into unconsciousness and Toran carried him out potato-sack fashion.
The next day, the ugly, battle-black ships of the Mule poured down upon the landing fields of
the planet Terminus. The attacking general sped down the empty main street of Terminus City
in a foreign-made ground car that ran where a whole city of atomic cars still stood useless.
The proclamation of occupation was made twenty-four hours to the minute after Seldon had
appeared before the former mighty of the Foundation.
Of all the Foundation planets, only the Independent Traders still stood, and against them the
power of the Mule – conqueror of the Foundation – now turned itself.
19. START OF THE SEARCH
The lonely planet, Haven – only planet of an only sun of a Galactic Sector that trailed raggedly
off into intergalactic vacuum – was under siege.
In a strictly military sense, it was certainly under siege, since no area of space on the Galactic
side further than twenty parsecs distance was outside range of the Mule's advance bases. In
the four months since the shattering fall of the Foundation, Haven's communications had fallen
apart like a spiderweb under the razor's edge. The ships of Haven converged inwards upon the
home world, and only Haven itself was now a fighting base.
And in other respects, the siege was even closer; for the shrouds of helplessness and doom
had already invaded
Bayta plodded her way down the pink-waved aisle past the rows of milky plastic-topped tables
and found her seat by blind reckoning. She eased on to the high, armless chair, answered
half-heard greetings mechanically, rubbed a wearily-itching eye with the back of a weary hand,
and reached for her menu.
She had time to register a violent mental reaction of distaste to the pronounced presence of
various cultured-fungus dishes, which were considered high delicacies at Haven, and which her
Foundation taste found highly inedible – and then she was aware of the sobbing near her and
looked up.
Until then, her notice of Juddee, the plain, snub-nosed, indifferent blonde at the dining unit
diagonally across had been the superficial one of the nonacquaintance. And now Juddee was
crying, biting woefully at a moist handkerchief, and choking back sobs until her complexion was
blotched with turgid red. Her shapeless radiation-proof costume was thrown back upon her
shoulders, and her transparent face shield had tumbled forward into her dessert, and there
remained.
Bayta joined the three girls who were taking turns at the eternally applied and eternally
inefficacious remedies of shoulder-patting, hair-smoothing, and incoherent murmuring.
"What's the matter?" she whispered.
One turned to her and shrugged a discreet, "I don't know." Then, feeling the inadequacy of the
gesture, she pulled Bayta aside.
"She's had a hard day, I guess. And she's worrying about her husband."
"Is he on space patrol?"
"Yes".
Bayta reached a friendly hand out to Juddee.
"Why don't you go home, Juddee?" Her voice was a cheerfully businesslike intrusion on the
soft, flabby inanities that had preceded.
Juddee looked up half in resentment. "I've been out once this week already–"
"Then you'll be out twice. If you try to stay on, you know, you'll just be out three days next week
– so going home now amounts to patriotism. Any of you girls work in her department? Well,
then, suppose you take care of her card. Better go to the washroom first, Juddee, and get the
peaches and cream back where it belongs. Go ahead! Shoo!"
Bayta returned to her seat and took up the menu again with a dismal relief. These moods were
contagious. One weeping girl would have her entire department in a frenzy these nerve-torn
days.
She made a distasteful decision, pressed the correct buttons at her elbow and put the menu
back into its niche.
The tall, dark girl opposite her was saying, "Isn't much any of us can do except cry, is there?"
Her amazingly full lips scarcely moved, and Bayta noticed that their ends were carefully
touched to exhibit that artificial, just-so half-smile that was the current last word in
sophistication.
Bayta investigated the insinuating thrust contained in the words with lashed eyes and
welcomed the diversion of the arrival of her lunch, as the tile-top of her unit moved inward and
the food lifted. She tore the wrappings carefully off her cutlery and handled them gingerly till
they cooled.
She said, "Can't you think of anything else to do, Hella?"
"Oh, yes," said Hella. "I can!" She flicked her cigarette with a casual and expert finger-motion
into the little recess provided and the tiny flash caught it before it hit shallow bottom.
"For instance," and Hella clasped slender, well-kept hands under her chin, "I think we could
make a very nice arrangement with the Mule and stop all this nonsense. But then I don't have
the ... uh ... facilities to manage to get out of places quickly when the Mule takes over."
Bayta's clear forehead remained clear. Her voice was light and indifferent. "You don't happen to
have a brother or husband in the fighting ships, do you?"
"No. All the more credit that I see no reason for the sacrifice of the brothers and husbands of
others."
"The sacrifice will come the more surely for surrender."
"The Foundation surrendered and is at peace. Our men are away and the Galaxy is against
us."
Bayta shrugged, and said sweetly, "I'm afraid it is the first of the pair that bothers you." She
returned to her vegetable platter and ate it with the clammy realization of the silence about her.
No one in ear-shot had cared to answer Hella's cynicism.
She left quickly, after stabbing at the button which cleared her dining unit for the next shift's
occupant.
A new girl, three seats away, stage-whispered to Hella, "Who was she?"
Hella's mobile lips curled in indifference. "She's our coordinator's niece. Didn't you know that?"
"Yes?" Her eyes sought out the last glimpse of disappearing back. "What's she doing here?"
"Just an assembly girl. Don't you know it's fashionable to be patriotic? It's all so democratic, it
makes me retch."
"Now, Hella," said the plump girl to her right. "She's never pulled her uncle on us yet. Why don't
you lay off?"
Hella ignored her neighbor with a glazed sweep of eyes and lit another cigarette.
The new girl was listening to the chatter of the bright-eyed accountant opposite. The words
were coming quickly,
"–and she's supposed to have been in the Vault – actually in the Vault, you know – when
Seldon spoke – and they say the mayor was in frothing furies and there were riots, and all of
that sort of thing, you know. She got away before the Mule landed, and they say she had the
most tha-rilling escape – had to go through the blockade, and all – and I do wonder she doesn't
write a book about it, these war books being so popular these days, you know. And she was
supposed to be on this world of the Mule's, too – Kalgan, you know – and–"
The time bell shrilled and the dining room emptied slowly. The accountant's voice buzzed on,
and the new girl interrupted only with the conventional and wide-eyed, "Really-y-y-y?" at
appropriate points.
The huge cave lights were being shielded group-wise in the gradual descent towards the
darkness that meant sleep for the righteous and hard-working, when Bayta returned home.
Toran met her at the door, with a slice of buttered bread in his hand.
"Where've you been?" he asked, food-muffled. Then, more clearly, "I've got a dinner of sorts
rassled up. If it isn't much, don't blame me."
But she was circling him, wide-eyed. "Torie! Where's your uniform? What are you doing in
civvies?"
"Orders, Bay. Randu is holed up with Ebling Mis right now, and what it's all about, I don't know.
So there you have everything."
"Am I going?" She moved towards him impulsively.
He kissed her before he answered, "I believe so. It will probably be dangerous."
"What isn't dangerous?"
"Exactly. Oh, yes, and I've already sent for Magnifico, so he's probably coming too."
"You mean his concert at the Engine Factory will have to be cancelled."
"Obviously."
Bayta passed into the next room and sat down to a meal that definitely bore signs of having
been "rassled-up." She cut the sandwiches in two with quick efficiency and said:
"That's too bad about the concert. The girls at the factory were looking forward to it. Magnifico,
too, for that matter." She shook her head. "He's such a queer thing."
"Stirs your mother-complex, Bay, that's what he does. Some day we'll have a baby, and then
you'll forget Magnifico."
'Bayta answered from the depths of her sandwich, "Strikes me that you're all the stirring my
mother-complex can stand."
And then she laid the sandwich down, and was gravely serious in a moment.
"Torie."
"M-m-m?"
"Torie, I was at City Hall today – at the Bureau of Production. That is why I was so late today."
"What were you doing there?"
"Well..." she hesitated, uncertainly. "It's been building up. I was getting so I couldn't stand it at
the factory. Morale just doesn't exist. The girls go on crying jags for no particular reason. Those
who don't get sick become sullen. Even the little mousie types pout. In my particular section,
production isn't a quarter what it was when I came, and there isn't a day that we have a full
roster of workers."
"All right," said Toran, "tie in the B. of P. What did you do there?"
"Asked a few questions. And it's so, Torie, it's so all over Haven. Dropping production,
increasing sedition and disaffection. The bureau chief just shrugged his shoulders – after I had
sat in the anteroom an hour to see him, and only got in because I was the co-ordinator's niece
– and said it was beyond him. Frankly, I don't think he cared."
"Now, don't go off base, Bay."
"I don't think he did." She was strenuously fiery. "I tell you there's something wrong. It's that
same horrible frustration that hit me in the Time Vault when Seldon deserted us. You felt it
yourself."
"Yes, I did."
"Well, it's back," she continued savagely. "And we'll never be able to resist the Mule. Even if we
had the material, we lack the heart, the spirit, the will – Torie, there's no use fighting–"
Bayta had never cried in Toran's memory, and she did not cry now. Not really. But Toran laid a
light hand on her shoulder and whispered, "Suppose you forget it, baby. I know what you mean.
But there's nothing–"
"Yes, there's nothing we can do! Everyone says that – and we just sit and wait for the knife to
come down."
She returned to what was left of her sandwich and tea. Quietly, Toran was arranging the beds.
It was quite dark outside.
Randu, as newly-appointed co-ordinator – in itself a wartime post – of the confederation of
cities on Haven, had been assigned, at his own request, to an upper room, out of the window of
which he could brood over the roof tops and greenery of the city. Now, in the fading of the cave
lights, the city receded into the level lack of distinction of the shades. Randu did not care to
meditate upon the symbolism.
He said to Ebling Mis – whose clear, little eyes seemed to have no further interest than the
red-filled goblet in his hand – "There's a saying on Haven that when the cave lights go out, it is
time for the righteous and hard-working to sleep."
"Do you sleep much lately?"
"No! Sorry to call you so late, Mis. I like the night better somehow these days. Isn't that
strange? The people on Haven condition themselves pretty strictly on the lack of light meaning
sleep. Myself, too. But it's different now–"
"You're hiding," said Mis, flatly. "You're surrounded by people in the waking period, and you feel
their eyes and their hopes on you. You can't stand up under it. In the sleep period, you're free."
"Do you feel it, too, then? This miserable sense of defeat?"
Ebling Mis nodded slowly, "I do. It's a mass psychosis, an unprintable mob panic. "Ga-LAX-y,
Randu, what do you expect? Here you have a whole culture brought up to a blind, blubbering
belief that a folk hero of the past has everything all planned out and is taking care of every little
piece of their unprintable lives. The thought-pattern evoked has religious characteristics, and
you know what that means."
"Not a bit."
Mis was not enthusiastic about the necessity of explanation. He never was. So he growled,
stared at the long cigar he rolled thoughtfully between his fingers and said, "Characterized by
strong faith reactions. Beliefs can't be shaken short of a major shock, in which case, a fairly
complete mental disruption results. Mild cases-hysteria, morbid sense of insecurity. Advanced
cases – madness and suicide."
Randu bit at a thumbnail. "When Seldon fails us, in other words, our prop disappears, and
we've been leaning upon it so long, our muscles are atrophied to where we can not stand
without it."
"That's it. Sort of a clumsy metaphor, but that's it."
"And you, Ebling, what of your own muscles?"
The psychologist filtered a long draught of air through his cigar, and let the smoke laze out.
"Rusty, but not atrophied. My profession has resulted in just a bit of independent thinking."
"And you see a way out?"
"No, but there must be one. Maybe Seldon made no provisions for the Mule. Maybe he didn't
guarantee our victory. But, then, neither did he guarantee defeat. He's just out of the game and
we're on our own. The Mule can be licked."
"How?"
"By the only way anyone can be licked – by attacking in strength at weakness. See here,
Randu, the Mule isn't a superman. If he is finally defeated, everyone will see that for himself.
It's just that he's an unknown, and the legends cluster quickly. He's supposed to be a mutant.
Well, what of that? A mutant means a 'superman' to the ignoramuses of humanity. Nothing of
the sort.
"It's been estimated that several million mutants are born in the Galaxy every day. Of the
several million, all but one or two percent can be detected only by means of microscopes and
chemistry. Of the one or two percent macromutants, that is, those with mutations detectable to
the naked eye or naked mind, all but one or two percent are freaks, fit for the amusement
centers, the laboratories, and death. Of the few macromutants whose differences are to the
good, almost all are harmless curiosities, unusual in some single respect, normal – and often
subnormal – in most others. You see that, Randu?"
"I do. But what of the Mule?"
"Supposing the Mule to be a mutant then, we can assume that he has some attribute,
undoubtedly mental, which can be used to conquer worlds. In other respects, he undoubtedly
has his shortcomings, which we must locate. He would not be so secretive, so shy of others'
eyes, if these shortcomings were not apparent and fatal. If he's a mutant."
"Is there an alternative?"
"There might be. Evidence for mutation rests on Captain Han Pritcher of what used to be
Foundation's Intelligence. He drew his conclusions from the feeble memories of those who
claimed to know the Mule-or somebody who might have been the Mule – in infancy and early
childhood. Pritcher worked on slim pickings there, and what evidence he found might easily
have been planted by the Mule for his own purposes, for it's certain that the Mule has been
vastly aided by his reputation as a mutant-superman."
"This is interesting. How long have you thought that?"
"I never thought that, in the sense of believing it. It is merely an alternative to be considered.
For instance, Randu, suppose the Mule has discovered a form of radiation capable of
depressing mental energy just as he is in possession of one which depresses nuclear
reactions. What then, eh? Could that explain what's hitting us now – and what did hit the
Foundation?"
Randu seemed immersed in a near-wordless gloom.
He said, "What of your own researches on the Mule's clown."
And now Ebling Mis hesitated. "Useless as yet. I spoke bravely to the mayor previous to the
Foundation's collapse, mainly to keep his courage up – partly to keep my own up as well. But,
Randu, if my mathematical tools were up to it, then from the clown alone I could analyze the
Mule completely. Then we would have him. Then we could solve the queer anomalies that have
impressed me already."
"Such as?"
"Think, man. The Mule defeated the navies of the Foundation at will, but he has not once
managed to force the much weaker fleets of the Independent Traders to retreat in open
combat. The Foundation fell at a blow; the Independent Traders hold out against all his
strength. He first used Extinguishing Field upon the nuclear weapons of the Independent
Traders of Mnemon. The element of surprise lost them that battle but they countered the Field.
He was never able to use it successfully against the Independents again.
"But over and over again, it worked against Foundation forces. It worked on the Foundation
itself. Why? With our present knowledge, it is all illogical. So there must be factors of which we
are not aware."
"Treachery?"
"That's rattle-pated nonsense, Randu. Unprintable twaddle. There wasn't a man on the
Foundation who wasn't sure of victory. Who would betray a certain-to-win side."
Randu stepped to the curved window and stared unseeingly out into the unseeable. He said,
"But we're certain to lose now, if the Mule had a thousand weaknesses; if he were a network of
holes–"
He did not turn. It was as if the slump of his back, the nervous groping for one another of the
hands behind him that spoke. He said, "We escaped easily after the Time Vault episode,
Ebling. Others might have escaped as well. A few did. Most did not. The Extinguishing Field
could have been counteracted. It asked ingenuity and a certain amount of labor. All the ships of
the Foundation Navy could have flown to Haven or other nearby planets to continue the fight as
we did. Not one percent did so. In effect, they deserted to the enemy.
"The Foundation underground, upon which most people here seem to rely so heavily, has thus
far done nothing of consequence. The Mule has been politic enough to promise to safeguard
the property and profits of the great Traders and they have gone over to him."
Ebling Mis said stubbornly, "The plutocrats have always been against us."
"They always held the power, too. Listen, Ebling. We have reason to believe that the Mule or
his tools have already been in contact with powerful men among the Independent Traders. At
least ten of the twenty-seven Trading Worlds are known to have gone over to the Mule.
Perhaps ten more waver. There are personalities on Haven itself who would not be unhappy
over the Mule's domination. It's apparently an insurmountable temptation to give up
endangered political power, if that will maintain your hold over economic affairs. "
"You don't think Haven can fight the Mule?"
"I don't think Haven will." And now Randu turned his troubled face full upon the psychologist. "I
think Haven is waiting to surrender. It's what I called you here to tell you. I want you to leave
Haven."
Ebling Mis puffed up his plump checks in amazement. "Already?"
Randu felt horribly tired. "Ebling, you are the Foundation's greatest psychologist. The real
master-psychologists went out with Seldon, but you're the best we have. You're our only
chance of defeating the Mule. You can't do that here; you'll have to go to what's left of the
Empire."
"To Trantor?"
"That's right. What was once the Empire is bare bones today, but something must still be at the
center. They've got the records there, Ebling. You may learn more of mathematical psychology;
perhaps enough to be able to interpret the clown's mind. He will go with you, of course."
Mis responded dryly, "I doubt if he'd be willing to, even for fear of the Mule, unless your niece
went with him."
"I know that. Toran and Bayta are leaving with you for that very reason. And, Ebling, there's
another, greater purpose. Hari Seldon founded two Foundations three centuries ago; one at
each end of the Galaxy. You must find that Second Foundation."
20. CONSPIRATOR
The mayor's palace – what was once the mayor's palace – was a looming smudge in the
darkness. The city was quiet under its conquest and curfew, and the hazy milk of the great
Galactic Lens, with here and there a lonely star, dominated the sky of the Foundation.
In three centuries the Foundation had grown from a private project of a small group of scientists
to a tentacular trade empire sprawling deep into the Galaxy and half a year had flung it from its
heights to the status of another conquered province.
Captain Han Pritcher refused to grasp that.
The city's sullen nighttime quiet, the darkened palace, intruder-occupied, were symbolic
enough, but Captain Han Pritcher, just within the outer gate of the palace, with the tiny nuclear
bomb under his tongue, refused to understand.
A shape drifted closer – the captain bent his head.
The whisper came deathly low, "The alarm system is as it always was, captain. Proceed! It will
register nothing."
Softly, the captain ducked through the low archway, and down the fountain-lined path to what
had been Indbur's garden.
Four months ago had been the day in the Time Vault, the fullness of which his memory balked
at. Singly and separately the impressions would come back, unwelcome, mostly at night.
Old Seldon speaking his benevolent words that were so shatteringly wrong – the jumbled
confusion – Indbur, with his mayoral costume incongruously bright about his pinched,
unconscious face – the frightened crowds gathering quickly, waiting noiselessly for the
inevitable word of surrender – the young man, Toran, disappearing out of a side door with the
Mule's clown dangling over his shoulder.
And himself, somehow out of it all afterward, with his car unworkable.
Shouldering his way along and through the leaderless mob that was already leaving the city –
destination unknown.
Making blindly for the various rat holes which were – which had once been – the headquarters
for a democratic underground that for eighty years had been failing and dwindling.
And the rat holes were empty.
The next day, black alien ships were momentarily visible in the sky, sinking gently into the
clustered buildings of the nearby city. Captain Han Pritcher felt an accumulation of
helplessness and despair drown him.
He started his travels in earnest.
In thirty days he had covered nearly two hundred miles on foot, changed to the clothing of a
worker in the hydroponic factories whose body he found newly-dead by the side of the road,
grown a fierce beard of russet intensity
And found what was left of the underground.
The city was Newton, the district a residential one of one-time elegance slowly edging towards
squalor, the house an undistinguished member of a row, and the man a small-eyed, big-boned
whose knotted fists bulged through his pockets and whose wiry body remained unbudgingly in
the narrow door opening.
The captain mumbled, "I come from Miran."
The man returned the gambit, grimly. "Miran is early this year."
The captain said, "No earlier than last year."
But the man did not step aside. He said, "Who are you?"
"Aren't you Fox?"
"Do you always answer by asking?"
The captain took an imperceptibly longer breath, and then said calmly, "I am Han Pritcher,
Captain of the Fleet, and member of the Democratic Underground Party. Will you let me in?"
The Fox stepped aside. He said, "My real name is Orum Palley."
He held out his hand. The captain took it.
The room was well-kept, but not lavish. In one comer stood a decorative book-film projector,
which to the captain's military eyes might easily have been a camouflaged blaster of
respectable caliber. The projecting lens covered the doorway, and such could be remotely
controlled.
The Fox followed his bearded guest's eyes, and smiled tightly. He said, "Yes! But only in the
days of Indbur and his lackey-hearted vampires. It wouldn't do much against the Mule, eh?
Nothing would help against the Mule. Are you hungry?"
The captain's jaw muscles tightened beneath his beard, and he nodded.
"It'll take a minute if you don't mind waiting." The Fox removed cans from a cupboard and
placed two before Captain Pritcher. "Keep your finger on it, and break them when they're hot
enough. My heat-control unit's out of whack. Things like that remind you there's a war on – or
was on, eh?"
His quick words had a jovial content, but were said in anything but a jovial tone – and his eyes
were coldly thoughtful. He sat down opposite the captain and said, "There'll be nothing but a
burn-spot left where you're sitting, if there's anything about you I don't like. Know that?"
The captain did not answer. The cans before him opened at a pressure.
The Fox said, shortly, "Stew! Sorry, but the food situation is short."
"I know," said the captain. He ate quickly; not looking up.
The Fox said, "I once saw you. I'm trying to remember, and the beard is definitely out of the
picture."
"I haven't shaved in thirty days." Then, fiercely, "What do you want? I had the correct
passwords. I have identification."
The other waved a hand, "Oh, I'll grant you're Pritcher all right. But there are plenty who have
the passwords, and the identifications, and the identities – who are with the Mule. Ever hear of
Levvaw, eh?"
"Yes."
"He's with the Mule."
"What? He–"
"Yes. He was the man they called 'No Surrender.'" The Fox's lips made laughing motions, with
neither sound nor humor. "Then there's Willig. With the Mule! Garre and Noth. With the Mule!
Why not Pritcher as well, eh? How would I know?"
The captain merely shook his head.
"But it doesn't matter," said the Fox, softly. "They must have my name, if Noth has gone over –
so if you're legitimate, you're in more new danger than I am over our acquaintanceship."
The captain had finished eating. He leaned back, "If you have no organization here, where can
I find one? The Foundation may have surrendered, but I haven't."
"So! You can't wander forever, captain. Men of the Foundation must have travel permits to
move from town to town these days. You know that? Also identity cards. You have one? Also,
all officers of the old Navy have been requested to report to the nearest occupation
headquarters. That's you, eh?"
"Yes." The captain's voice was hard. "Do you think I run through fear. I was on Kalgan not long
after its fall to the Mule. Within a month, not one of the old warlord's officers was at large,
because they were the natural military leaders of any revolt. It's always been the underground's
knowledge that no revolution can be successful without the control of at least part of the Navy.
The Mule evidently knows it, too."
The Fox nodded thoughtfully, "Logical enough. The Mule is thorough."
"I discarded the uniform as soon as I could. I grew the beard. Afterwards there may be a
chance that others have taken the same action."
"Are you married?"
"My wife is dead. I have no children.
"You're hostage-immune, then."
"Yes."
"You want my advice?"
"If you have any."
A don't know what the Mule's policy is or what he intends, but skilled workers have not been
harmed so far. Pay rates have gone up. Production of all sorts of nuclear weapons is booming."
"Yes? Sounds like a continuing offensive."
"I don't know. The Mule's a subtle son of a drab, and he may merely be soothing the workers
into submission. If Seldon couldn't figure him out with all his psychohistory, I'm not going to try.
But you're wearing work clothes. That suggests something, eh?"
"I'm not a skilled worker."
"You've had a military course in nucleics, haven't you?"
"Certainly."
"That's enough. The Nuclear-Field Bearings, Inc., is located here in town. Tell them you've had
experience. The stinkers who used to run the factory for Indbur are still running it – for the
Mule. They won't ask questions, as long as they need more workers to make their fat hunk.
They'll give you an identity card and you can apply for a room in the Corporation's housing
district. You might start now."
In that manner, Captain Han Pritcher of the National Fleet became Shield-man Lo Moro of the
45 Shop of Nuclear-Field Bearings, Inc. And from an Intelligence agent, he descended the
social scale to "conspirator"– a calling which led him months later to what had been Indbur's
private garden,
In the garden, Captain Pritcher consulted the radometer in the palm of his hand. The inner
warning field was still in operation, and he waited. Half an hour remained to the life of the
nuclear bomb in his mouth. He rolled it gingerly with his tongue.
The radometer died into an ominous darkness and the captain advanced quickly.
So far, matters had progressed well.
He reflected objectively that the life of the nuclear bomb was his as well; that its death was his
death – and the Mule's death.
And the grand climacteric of a four-month's private war would be reached; a war that had
passed from flight through a Newton factory
For two months, Captain Pritcher wore leaden aprons and heavy face shields, till all things
military had been frictioned off his outer bearing. He was a laborer, who collected his pay, spent
his evenings in town, and never discussed politics.
For two months, he did not see the Fox.
And then, one day, a man stumbled past his bench, and there was a scrap of paper in his
pocket. The word "Fox" was on it. He tossed it into the nuclear chamber, where it vanished in a
sightless puff, sending the energy output up a millimicrovolt – and turned back to his work.
That night he was at the Fox's home, and took a hand in a game of cards with two other men
he knew by reputation and one by name and face.
Over the cards and the passing and repassing tokens, they spoke.
The captain said, "It's a fundamental error. You live in the exploded past. For eighty years our
organization has been waiting for the correct historical moment. We've been blinded by
Seldon's psychohistory, one of the first propositions of which is that the individual does not
count, does not make history, and that complex social and economic factors override him,
make a puppet out of him." He adjusted his cards carefully, appraised their value and said, as
he put out a token. "Why not kill the Mule?"
"Well, now, and what good would that do?" demanded the man at his left, fiercely.
"You see," said the captain, discarding two cards, "that's the attitude. What is one man – out of
quadrillions. The Galaxy won't stop rotating because one man dies. But the Mule is not a man,
he is a mutant. Already, he had upset Seldon's plan, and if you'll stop to analyze the
implications, it means that he – one man – one mutant – upset all of Seldon's psychohistory. If
he had never lived, the Foundation would not have fallen. If he ceased living, it would not
remain fallen.
"Come, the democrats have fought the mayors and the traders for eighty years by connivery.
Let's try assassination."
"How?" interposed the Fox, with cold common sense.
The captain said, slowly, "I've spent three months of thought on that with no solution. I came
here and had it in five minutes." He glanced briefly at the man whose broad, pink melon of a
face smiled from the place at his right. "You were once Mayor Indbur's chamberlain. I did not
know you were of the underground,"
"Nor I, that you were."
"Well, then, in your capacity as chamberlain you periodically checked the working of the alarm
system of the palace."
"I did."
"And the Mule occupies the palace now."
"So it has been announced – though he is a modest conqueror who makes no speeches,
proclamations nor public appearances of any sort."
"That's an old story, and affects nothing. You, my ex-chamberlain, are all we need."
The cards were shown and the Fox collected the stakes. Slowly, he dealt a new hand.
The man who had once been chamberlain picked up his cards, singly. "Sorry, captain. I
checked the alarm system, but it was routine. I know nothing about it."
"I expected that, but your mind carries an eidetic memory of the controls if it can be probed
deeply enough – with a psychic probe."
The chamberlain's ruddy face paled suddenly and sagged. The cards in his hand crumpled
under sudden fist-pressure, "A psychic probe?"
"You needn't worry," said the captain, sharply. "I know how to use one. It will not harm you past
a few days' weakness. And if it did, it is the chance you take and the price you pay. There are
some among us, no doubt, who from the controls of the alarm could determine the wavelength
combinations. There are some among us who could manufacture a small bomb under
time-control and I myself will carry it to the Mule."
The men gathered over the table.
The captain announced, "On a given evening, a riot will start in Terminus City in the
neighborhood of the palace. No real fighting. Disturbance – then flight. As long as the palace
guard is attracted ... or, at the very least, distracted–"
From that day for a month the preparations went on, and Captain Han Pritcher of the National
Fleet having become conspirator descended further in the social scale and became an
"assassin."
Captain Pritcher, assassin, was in the palace itself, and found himself grimly pleased with his
psychology. A thorough alarm system outside meant few guards within. In this case, it meant
none at all.
The floor plan was clear in his mind. He was a blob moving noiselessly up the well-carpeted
ramp. At its head, he flattened against the wall and waited.
The small closed door of a private room was before him. Behind that door must be the mutant
who had beaten the unbeatable. He was early – the bomb had ten minutes of life in it.
Five of these passed, and still in all the world there was no sound. The Mule had five minutes to
live – So had Captain Pritcher–
He stepped forward on sudden impulse. The plot could no longer fail. When the bomb went, the
palace would go with it – all the palace. A door between – ten yards between – was nothing.
But he wanted to see the Mule as they died together.
In a last, insolent gesture, he thundered upon the door.
And it opened and let out the blinding light.
Captain Pritcher staggered, then caught himself. The solemn man, standing in the center of the
small room before a suspended fish bowl, looked up mildly.
His uniform was a somber black, and as he tapped the bowl in an absent gesture, it bobbed
quickly and the feather-finned, orange and vermilion fish within darted wildly.
He said, "Come in, captain!"
To the captain's quivering tongue the little metal globe beneath was swelling ominously – a
physical impossibility, the captain knew. But it was in its last minute of life.
The uniformed man said, "You had better spit out the foolish pellet and free yourself for speech.
It won't blast."
The minute passed and with a slow, sodden motion the captain bent his head and dropped the
silvery globe into his palm. With a furious force it was flung against the wall. It rebounded with a
tiny, sharp clangor, gleaming harmlessly as it flew.
The uniformed man shrugged. "So much for that, then. It would have done you no good in any
case, captain. I am not the Mule. You will have to be satisfied with his viceroy."
"How did you know?" muttered the captain, thickly.
"Blame it on an efficient counter-espionage system. I can name every member of your little
gang, every step of their planning–"
"And you let it go this far?"
"Why not? It has been one of my great purposes here to find you and some others. Particularly
you. I might have had you some months ago, while you were still a worker at the Newton
Bearings Works, but this is much better. If you hadn't suggested the main outlines of the plot
yourself, one of my own men would have advanced something of much the same sort for you.
The result is quite dramatic, and rather grimly humorous."
The captain's eyes were hard. "I find it so, too. Is it all over now?"
"Just begun. Come, captain, sit down. Let us leave heroics for the fools who are impressed by
it. Captain, you are a capable man. According to the information I have, you were the first on
the Foundation to recognize the power of the Mule. Since then you have interested yourself,
rather daringly, in the Mule's early life. You have been one of those who carried off his clown,
who, incidentally, has not yet been found, and for which there will yet be full payment. Naturally,
your ability is recognized and the Mule is not of those who fear the ability of his enemies as
long as he can convert it into the ability of a new friend."
"Is that what you're hedging up to? Oh, no!"
"Oh, yes! It was the purpose of tonight's comedy. You are an intelligent man, yet your little
conspiracies against die Mule fail humorously. You can scarcely dignify it with the name of
conspiracy. Is it part of your military training to waste ships in hopeless actions?"
"One must first admit them to be hopeless."
"One will," the viceroy assured him, gently. "The Mule has conquered the Foundation, It is
rapidly being turned into an arsenal for accomplishment of his greater aims."
"What greater aims?"
"The conquest of the entire Galaxy. The reunion of all the tom worlds into a new Empire. The
fulfillment, you dull-witted patriot, of your own Seldon's dream seven hundred years before he
hoped to see it. And in the fulfillment, you can help us."
"I can, undoubtedly. But I won't, undoubtedly."
"I understand," reasoned the viceroy, "that only three of the Independent Trading Worlds yet
resist. They will not last much longer. It will be the last of all Foundation forces. You still hold
out."
"Yes."
"Yet you won't. A voluntary recruit is the, most efficient. But the other kind will do.
Unfortunately, the Mule is absent. He leads the fight, as always, against the resisting Traders.
But he is in continual contact with us. You will not have to wait long."
"For what?"
"For your conversion.
"The Mule," said the captain, frigidly, "will find that beyond his ability."
"But he won't. I was not beyond it. You don't recognize me? Come, you were on Kalgan, so you
have seen me. I wore a monocle, a fur-lined scarlet robe, a high-crowned hat–"
The captain stiffened in dismay. "You were the warlord of Kalgan."
"Yes. And now I am the loyal viceroy of the Mule. You see, he is persuasive."
21. INTERLUDE IN SPACE
The blockade was run successfully. In the vast volume of space, not all the navies ever in
existence could keep their watch in tight proximity. Given a single ship, a skillful pilot, and a
moderate degree of luck, and there are holes and to spare.
With cold-eyed calm, Toran drove a protesting vessel from the vicinity of one star to that of
another. If the neighborhood of great mass made an interstellar jump erratic and difficult, it also
made the enemy detection devices useless or nearly so.
And once the girdle of ships had been passed the inner sphere of dead space, through whose
blockaded sub-ether no message could be driven, was passed as well. For the first time in over
three months Toran felt unisolated.
A week passed before the enemy news programs dealt with anything more than the dull,
self-laudatory details of growing control over the Foundation. It was a week in which Toran's
armored trading ship fled inward from the Periphery in hasty jumps.
Ebling Mis called out to the pilot room and Toran rose blink-eyed from his charts.
"What's the matter?" Toran stepped down into the small central chamber which Bayta had
inevitably devised into a living room.
Mis shook his head, "Bescuppered if I know. The Mule's newsmen are announcing a special
bulletin. Thought you might want to get in on it."
"Might as well. Where's Bayta?"
"Setting the table in the diner and picking out a menuor some such frippery."
Toran sat down upon the cot that served as Magnifico's bed, and waited. The propaganda
routine of the Mule's "special bulletins" were monotonously similar. First the martial music, and
then the buttery slickness of the announcer. The minor news items would come, following one
another in patient lock step. Then the pause. Then the trumpets and the rising excitement and
the climax.
Toran endured it. Mis muttered to himself.
The newscaster spilled out, in conventional war-correspondent phraseology, the unctuous
words that translated into sound the molten metal and blasted flesh of a battle in space.
"Rapid cruiser squadrons under Lieutenant General Sammin hit back hard today at the task
force striking out from Iss–" The carefully expressionless face of the speaker upon the screen
faded into the blackness of a space cut through by the quick swaths of ships reeling across
emptiness in deadly battle. The voice continued through the soundless thunder
"The most striking action of the battle was the subsidiary combat of the heavy cruiser Cluster
against three enemy ships of the 'Nova' class–"
The screen's view veered and closed in. A great ship sparked and one of the frantic attackers
glowed angrily, twisted out of focus, swung back and rammed. The Cluster bowed wildly and
survived the glancing blow that drove the attacker off in twisting reflection.
The newsman's smooth unimpassioned delivery continued to the last blow and the last hulk.
Then a pause, and a large similar voice-and-picture of the fight off Mnemon, to which the
novelty was added of a lengthy description of a hit-and-run landing – the picture of a blasted
city – huddled and weary prisoners – and off again.
Mnemon had not long to live.
The pause again – and this time the raucous sound of the expected brasses. The screen faded
into the long, impressively soldier-lined corridor up which the government spokesman in
councilor's uniform strode quickly.
The silence was oppressive.
The voice that came at last was solemn, slow and hard: "By order of our sovereign, it is
announced that the planet, Haven, hitherto in warlike opposition to his will, has submitted to the
acceptance of defeat. At this moment, the forces of our sovereign are occupying the planet.
Opposition was scattered, unco-ordinated, and speedily crushed."
The scene faded out, the original newsman returned to state importantly that other
developments would be transmitted as they occurred.
Then there was dance music, and Ebling Mis threw the shield that cut the power.
Toran rose and walked unsteadily away, without a word. The psychologist made no move to
stop him.
When Bayta stepped out of the kitchen, Mis motioned silence.
He said, "They've taken Haven."
And Bayta said, "Already?" Her eyes were round, and sick with disbelief.
"Without a fight. Without an unprin–" He stopped and swallowed. "You'd better leave Toran
alone. It's not pleasant for him. Suppose we eat without him this once."
Bayta looked once toward the pilot room, then turned hopelessly. "Very well!"
Magnifico sat unnoticed at the table. He neither spoke nor ate but stared ahead with a
concentrated fear that seemed to drain all the vitality out of his thread of a body.
Ebling Mis pushed absently at his iced-fruit dessert and said, harshly, "Two Trading worlds
fight. They fight, and bleed, and die and don't surrender. Only at Haven – Just as at the
Foundation–"
"But why? Why?"
The psychologist shook his head. "It's of a piece with all the problem. Every queer facet is a
hint at the nature of the Mule. First, the problem of how he could conquer the Foundation, with
little blood, and at a single blow essentially – while the Independent Trading Worlds held out.
The blanket on nuclear reactions was a puny weapon – we've discussed that back and forth till
I'm sick of it – and it did not work on any but the Foundation.
"Randu suggested," and Ebling's grizzly eyebrows pulled together, "it might have been a
radiant Will-Depresser. It's what might have done the work on Haven. But then why wasn't it
used on Mnemon and Iss – which even now fight with such demonic intensity that it is taking
half the Foundation fleet in addition to the Mule's forces to beat them down. Yes, I recognized
Foundation ships in the attack."
Bayta whispered, "The Foundation, then Haven. Disaster seems to follow us, without touching.
We always seem to get out by a hair. Will it last forever?"
Ebling Mis was not listening. To himself, he was making a point. "But there's another problem –
another problem. Bayta, you remember the news item that the Mule's clown was not found on
Terminus; that it was suspected he had fled to Haven, or been carried there by his original
kidnappers. There is an importance attached to him, Bayta, that doesn't fade, and we have not
located it yet. Magnifico must know something that is fatal to the Mule. I'm sure of it. "
Magnifico, white and stuttering, protested, "Sire ... noble lord ... indeed, I swear it is past my
poor reckoning to penetrate your wants. I have told what I know to the utter limits, and with your
probe, you have drawn out of my meager wit that which I knew, but knew not that I knew."
"I know ... I know. It is something small. A hint so small that neither you nor I recognize it for
what it is. Yet I must find it – for Mnemon and Iss will go soon, and when they do, we are the
last remnants, the last droplets of the independent Foundation."
The stars begin to cluster closely when the core of the Galaxy is penetrated. Gravitational fields
begin to overlap at intensities sufficient to introduce perturbations in an interstellar jump that
can not be overlooked.
Toran became aware of that when a jump landed their ship in the full glare of a red giant which
clutched viciously, and whose grip was loosed, then wrenched apart, only after twelve
sleepless, soul-battering hours.
With charts limited in scope, and an experience not at all fully developed, either operationally or
mathematically, Toran resigned himself to days of careful plotting between jumps.
It became a community project of a sort. Ebling Mis checked Toran's mathematics and Bayta
tested possible routes, by the various generalized methods, for the presence of real solutions.
Even Magnifico was put to work on the calculating machine for routine computations, a type of
work, which, once explained, was a source of great amusement to him and at which he was
surprisingly proficient.
So at the end of a month, or nearly, Bayta was able to survey the red line that wormed its way
through the ship's trimensional model of the Galactic Lens halfway to its center, and say with
Satiric relish, "You know what it looks like. It looks like a ten-foot earth-worm with a terrific case
of indigestion. Eventually, you'll land us back in Haven."
"I will," growled Toran, with a fierce rustle of his chart, "if you don't shut up."
"And at that," continued Bayta, "there is probably a route fight through, straight as a meridian of
longitude."
"Yeah? Well, in the first place, dimwit, it probably took five hundred ships five hundred years to
work out that route by hit-and-miss, and my lousy half-credit charts don't give it. Besides,
maybe those straight routes are a good thing to avoid. They're probably choked up with ships.
And besides–"
"Oh, for Galaxy's sake, stop driveling and slavering so much righteous indignation." Her hands
were in his hair.
He yowled, "Ouch! Let go!" seized her wrists and whipped downward, whereupon Toran, Bayta,
and chair formed a tangled threesome on the floor. It degenerated into a panting wrestling
match, composed mostly of choking laughter and various foul blows.
Toran broke loose at Magnifico's breathless entrance.
"What is it?"
The lines of anxiety puckered the clown's face and tightened the skin whitely over the
enormous bridge of his nose. "The instruments are behaving queerly, sir. I have not, in the
knowledge of my ignorance, touched anything–"
In two seconds, Toran was in the pilot room. He said quietly to Magnifico, "Wake up Ebling Mis.
Have him come down here."
He said to Bayta, who was trying to get a basic order back to her hair by use of her fingers,
"We've been detected, Bay."
"Detected?" And Bayta's arms dropped. "By whom?"
"Galaxy knows," muttered Toran, "but I imagine by someone with blasters already ranged and
trained."
He sat down and in a low voice was already sending into the sub-ether the ship's identification
code.
And when Ebling Mis entered, bathrobed and blear-eyed, Toran said with a desperate calm, "It
seems we're inside the borders of a local Inner Kingdom which is called the Autarchy of Filia."
"Never heard of it," said Mis, abruptly.
"Well, neither did I," replied Toran, "but we're being stopped by a Filian ship just the same, and
I don't know what it will involve."
The captain-inspector of the Filian ship crowded aboard with six armed men following him. He
was short, thin-haired, thin-lipped, and dry-skinned. He coughed a sharp cough as he sat down
and threw open the folio under his arm to a blank page.
"Your passports and ship's clearance, please."
"We have none," said Toran.
"None, hey?" he snatched up a microphone suspended from his belt and spoke into it quickly,
"Three men and one woman. Papers not in order." He made an accompanying notation in the
folio.
He said, "Where are you from?"
"Siwenna," said Toran warily.
"Where is that?"
"Thirty thousand parsecs, eighty degrees west Trantor, forty degrees–"
"Never mind, never mind!" Toran could see that his inquisitor had written down: "Point of origin
– Periphery."
The Filian continued, "Where are you going?"
Toran said, "Trantor sector."
"Purpose?"
"Pleasure trip."
"Carrying any cargo?"
"No."
"Hm-m-m. We'll check on that." He nodded and two men jumped to activity. Toran made no
move to interfere.
"What brings you into Filian territory?" The Filian's eyes gleamed unamiably.
"We didn't know we were. I lack a proper chart."
"You will be required to pay a hundred credits for that lack – and, of course, the usual fees
required for tariff duties, et cetera."
He spoke again into the microphone – but listened more than he spoke. Then, to Toran, "Know
anything about nuclear technology?"
"A little," replied Toran, guardedly.
"Yes?" The Filian closed his folio, and added, "The men of the Periphery have a knowledgeable
reputation that way. Put on a suit and come with me."
Bayta stepped forward, "What are you going to do with him?"
Toran put her aside gently, and asked coldly, "Where do you want me to come?"
"Our power plant needs minor adjustments. He'll come with you." His pointing finger aimed
directly at Magnifico, whose brown eyes opened wide in a blubbery dismay.
"What's he got to do with it?" demanded Toran fiercely.
The official looked up coldly. "I am informed of pirate activities in this vicinity. A description of
one of the known thugs tallies roughly. It is a purely routine matter of identification. "
Toran hesitated, but six men and six blasters are eloquent arguments. He reached into the
cupboard for the suits.
An hour later, he rose upright in the bowels of the Filian ship and raged, "There's not a thing
wrong with the motors that I can see. The busbars are true, the L-tubes are feeding properly
and the reaction analysis checks. Who's in charge here?"
The head engineer said quietly, "I am."
"Well, get me out of here–"
He was led to the officers' level and the small anteroom held only an indifferent ensign.
"Where's the man who came with me?"
"Please wait," said the ensign.
It was fifteen minutes later that Magnifico was brought in.
"What did they do to you?" asked Toran quickly.
"Nothing. Nothing at all." Magnifico's head shook a slow negative.
It took two hundred and fifty credits to fulfill the demands of Filia – fifty credits of it for instant
release – and they were in free space again.
Bayta said with a forced laugh, "Don't we rate an escort? Don't we get the usual figurative boot
over the border?"
And Toran replied, grimly, "That was no Filian ship – and we're not leaving for a while. Come in
here."
They gathered about him.
He said, whitely, "That was a Foundation ship, and those were the Mule's men aboard."
Ebling bent to pick up the cigar he had dropped. He said, "Here? We're fifteen thousand
parsecs from the Foundation. "
"And we're here. What's to prevent them from making the same trip. Galaxy, Ebling, don't you
think I can tell ships apart? I saw their engines, and that's enough for me. I tell you it was a
Foundation engine in a Foundation ship."
"And how did they get here?" asked Bayta, logically. "What are the chances of a random
meeting of two given ships in space?"
"What's that to do with it?" demanded Toran, hotly. "It would only show we've been followed."
"Followed?" hooted Bayta. "Through hyperspace?"
Ebling Mis interposed wearily, "That can be done – given a good ship and a great pilot. But the
possibility doesn't impress me."
"I haven't been masking my trail," insisted Toran. "I've been building up take-off speed on the
straight. A blind man could have calculated our route."
"The blazes he could," cried Bayta. "With the cockeyed jumps you are making, observing our
initial direction didn't mean a thing. We came out of the jump wrong-end forwards more than
once."
"We're wasting time," blazed Toran, with gritted teeth. "It's a Foundation ship under the Mule.
It's stopped us. It's searched us. It's had Magnifico – alone – with me as hostage to keep the
rest of you quiet, in case you suspected. And we're going to bum it out of space right now."
"Hold on now," and Ebling Mis clutched at him. "Are you going to destroy us for one ship you
think is an enemy? Think, man, would those scuppers chase us over an impossible route half
through the bestinkered Galaxy, look us over, and then let us go?"
"They're still interested in where we're going."
"Then why stop us and put us on our guard? You can't have it both ways, you know."
"I'll have it my way. Let go of me, Ebling, or I'll knock you down."
Magnifico leaned forward from his balanced perch on his favorite chair back. His long nostrils
flared with excitement. "I crave your pardon for my interruption, but my poor mind is of a
sudden plagued with a queer thought."
Bayta anticipated Toran's gesture of annoyance, and added her grip to Ebling's. "Go ahead and
speak, Magnifico. We will all listen faithfully."
Magnifico said, "In my stay in their ship what addled wits I have were bemazed and bemused
by a chattering fear that befell men. Of a truth I have a lack of memory of most that happened.
Many men staring at me, and talk I did not understand. But towards the last – as though a
beam of sunlight had dashed through a cloud rift – there was a face I knew. A glimpse, the
merest glimmer – and yet it glows in my memory ever stronger and brighter."
Toran said, "Who was it?"
"That captain who was with us so long a time ago, when first you saved me from slavery."
It had obviously been Magnifico's intention to create a sensation, and the delighted smile that
curled broadly in the shadow of his proboscis, attested to his realization of the intention's
success.
"Captain ... Han ... Pritcher?" demanded Mis, sternly. "You're sure of that? Certain sure now?"
"Sir, I swear," and he laid a bone-thin hand upon his narrow chest. "I would uphold the truth of it
before the Mule and swear it in his teeth, though all his power were behind him to deny it."
Bayta said in pure wonder, "Then what's it all about?" The clown faced her eagerly, "My lady, I
have a theory. It came upon me, ready made, as though the Galactic Spirit had gently laid it in
my mind." He actually raised his voice above Toran's interrupting objection.
"My lady," he addressed himself exclusively to Bayta, "if this captain had, like us, escaped with
a ship; if he, like us, were on a trip for a purpose of his own devising; if he blundered upon us –
he would suspect us of following and waylaying him, as we suspect him of the like. What
wonder he played this comedy to enter our ship?"
"Why would he want us in his ship, then?" demanded Toran. "That doesn't fit."
"Why, yes, it does," clamored the clown, with a flowing inspiration. "He sent an underling who
knew us not, but who described us into his microphone. The listening captain would be struck
at my own poor likeness – for, of a truth there are not many in this great Galaxy who bear a
resemblance to my scantiness. I was the proof of the identity of the rest of you."
"And so he leaves us?"
"What do we know of his mission, and the secrecy thereof? lie has spied us out for not an
enemy and having it done so, must he needs think it wise to risk his plan by widening the
knowledge thereof?"
Bayta said slowly, "Don't be stubborn, Torie. It does explain things."
"It could be," agreed Mis.
Toran seemed helpless in the face of united resistance. Something in the clown's fluent
explanations bothered him. Something was wrong. Yet he was bewildered and, in spite of
himself, his anger ebbed.
"For a while," he whispered, "I thought we might have had one of the Mule's ships."
And his eyes were dark with the pain of Haven's loss.
The others understood.
22. DEATH ON NEOTRANTOR
NEOTRANTOR The small planet of Delicass, renamed after the Great Sack, was for nearly a
century, the seat of the last dynasty of the First Empire. It was a shadow world and a shadow
Empire and its existence is only of legalistic importance. Under the first of the Neotrantorian
dynasty....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
Neotrantor was the name! New Trantor! And when you have said the name you have
exhausted at a stroke all the resemblances of the new Trantor to the great original. Two
parsecs away, the sun of Old Trantor still shone and the Galaxy's Imperial Capital of the
previous century still cut through space in the silent and eternal repetition of its orbit.
Men even inhabited Old Trantor. Not many – a hundred million, perhaps, where fifty years
before, forty billions had swarmed. The huge, metal world was in jagged splinters. The towering
thrusts of the multi-towers from the single world-girdling base were torn and empty – still
bearing the original blastholes and firegut – shards of the Great Sack of forty years earlier.
It was strange that a world which had been the center of a Galaxy for two thousand years – that
had ruled limitless space and been home to legislators and rulers whose whims spanned the
parsecs – could die in a month. It was strange that a world which had been untouched through
the vast conquering sweeps and retreats of a millennia, and equally untouched by the civil wars
and palace revolutions of other millennia – should lie dead at last. It was strange that the Glory
of the Galaxy should be a rotting corpse.
And pathetic!
For centuries would yet pass before the mighty works of fifty generations of humans would
decay past use. Only the declining powers of men, themselves, rendered them useless now.
The millions left after the billions had died tore up the gleaming metal base of the planet and
exposed soil that had not felt the touch of sun in a thousand years.
Surrounded by the mechanical perfections of human efforts, encircled by the industrial marvels
of mankind freed of the tyranny of environment – they returned to the land. In the huge traffic
clearings, wheat and corn grew. In the shadow of the towers, sheep grazed.
But Neotrantor existed – an obscure village of a planet drowned in the shadow of mighty
Trantor, until a heart-throttled royal family, racing before the fire and flame of the Great Sack
sped to it as its last refuge – and held out there, barely, until the roaring wave of rebellion
subsided. There it ruled in ghostly splendor over a cadaverous remnant of Imperium.
Twenty agricultural worlds were a Galactic Empire!
Dagobert IX, ruler of twenty worlds of refractory squires and sullen peasants, was Emperor of
the Galaxy, Lord of the Universe.
Dagobert IX had been twenty-five on the bloody day he arrived with his father upon Neotrantor.
His eyes and mind were still alive with the glory and the power of the Empire that was. But his
son, who might one day be Dagobert X, was born on Neotrantor.
Twenty worlds were all he knew.
Jord Commason's open air car was the finest vehicle of its type on all Neotrantor – and, after
all, justly so. It did not end with the fact that Commason was the largest landowner on
Neotrantor. It began there. For in earlier days he had been the companion and evil genius of a
young crown prince, restive in the dominating grip of a middle-aged emperor. And now he was
the companion and still the evil genius of a middle-aged crown prince who hated and
dominated an old emperor.
So Jord Commason, in his air car, which in mother-of-pearl finish and gold-and-lumetron
ornamentation needed no coat of arms as owner's identification, surveyed the lands that were
his, and the miles of rolling wheat that were his, and the huge threshers and harvesters that
were his, and the tenant-farmers and machine-tenders that were his – and considered his
problems cautiously.
Beside him, his bent and withered chauffeur guided the ship gently through the upper winds
and smiled.
Jord Commason spoke to the wind, the air, and the sky, "You remember what I told you,
Inchney?"
Inchney's thin gray hair wisped lightly in the wind. His gap-toothed smile widened in its
thin-lipped fashion and the vertical wrinkles of his cheeks deepened as though he were keeping
an eternal secret from himself. The whisper of his voice whistled between his teeth.
"I remember, sire, and I have thought."
"And what have you thought, Inchney?" There was an impatience about the question.
Inchney remembered that he had been young and handsome, and a lord on Old Trantor.
Inchney remembered that he was a disfigured ancient on Neotrantor, who lived by grace of
Squire Jord Commason, and paid for the grace by lending his subtlety on request. He sighed
very softly.
He whispered again, "Visitors from the Foundation, sire, are a convenient thing to have.
Especially, sire, when they come with but a single ship, and but a single fighting man. How
welcome they might be."
"Welcome?" said Commason, gloomily. "Perhaps so. But those men are magicians and may be
powerful."
"Pugh," muttered Inchney, "the mistiness of distance hides the truth. The Foundation is but a
world. Its citizens are but men. If you blast them, they die."
Inchney held the ship on its course – A river was a winding sparkle below. He whispered, "And
is there not a man they speak of now who stirs the worlds of the Periphery?"
Commason was suddenly suspicious. "What do you know of this?"
There was no smile on his chauffeur's face. "Nothing, sire. It was but an idle question."
The squire's hesitation was short. He said, with brutal directness, "Nothing you ask is idle, and
your method of acquiring knowledge will have your scrawny neck in a vise yet. But – I have it!
This man is called the Mule, and a subject of his had been here some months ago on a ...
matter of business. I await another ... now ... for its conclusion."
"And these newcomers? They are not the ones you want, perhaps?"
"They lack the identification they should have."
"It has been reported that the Foundation has been captured–"
"I did not tell you that."
"It has been so reported," continued Inchney, coolly, "and if that is correct, then these may be
refugees from the destruction, and may be held for the Mule's man out of honest friendship."
"Yes?" Commason was uncertain.
"And, sire, since it is well-known that the friend of a conqueror is but the last victim, it would be
but a measure of honest self-defense. For there are such things as psychic probes, and here
we have four Foundation brains. There is much about the Foundation it would be useful to
know, much even about the Mule. And then the Mule's friendship would be a trifle the less
overpowering."
Commason, in the quiet of the upper air, returned with a shiver to his first thought. "But if the
Foundation has not fallen. If the reports are lies. It is said that it has been foretold it can not
fall."
"We are past the age of soothsayers, sire."
"And yet if it did not fall, Inchney. Think! If it did not fall. The Mule made me promises, indeed–"
He had gone too far, and backtracked. "That is, he made boasts. But boasts are wind and
deeds are hard."
Inchney laughed noiselessly. "Deeds are hard indeed, until begun. One could scarcely find a
further fear than a Galaxy-end Foundation."
"There is still the prince," murmured Commason, almost to himself.
"He deals with the Mule also, then, sire?"
Commason could not quite choke down the complacent shift of features. "Not entirely. Not as I
do. But he grows wilder, more uncontrollable. A demon is upon him. If I seize these people and
he takes them away for his own use – for he does not lack a certain shrewdness – I am not yet
ready to quarrel with him." He frowned and his heavy cheeks bent downwards with dislike.
"I saw those strangers for a few moments yesterday," said the gray chauffeur, irrelevantly, "and
it is a strange woman, that dark one. she walks with the freedom of a man and she is of a
startling paleness against the dark luster of hair." There was almost a warmth in the husky
whisper of the withered voice, so that Commason turned toward him in sudden surprise.
Inchney continued, "The prince, I think, would not find his shrewdness proof against a
reasonable compromise. You could have the rest, if you left him the girl–"
A light broke upon Commason, "A thought! Indeed a thought! Inchney, turn back! And Inchney,
if all turns well, we will discuss further this matter of your freedom."
It was with an almost superstitious sense of symbolism that Commason found a Personal
Capsule waiting for him in his private study when he returned. It had arrived by a wavelength
known to few. Commason smiled a fat smile. The Mule's man was coming and the Foundation
had indeed fallen.
Bayta's misty visions, when she had them, of an Imperial palace, did not jibe with the reality,
and inside her, there was a vague sense of disappointment. The room was small, almost plain,
almost ordinary. The palace did not even match the mayor's residence back at the Foundation
– and Dagobert IX –
Bayta had definite ideas of what an emperor ought to look like. He ought not look like
somebody's benevolent grandfather. He ought not be thin and white and faded – or serving
cups of tea with his own hand in an expressed anxiety for the comfort of his visitors.
But so it was.
Dagobert IX chuckled as he poured tea into her stiffly outheld cup.
"This is a great pleasure for me, my dear. It is a moment away from ceremony and courtiers. I
have not had the opportunity for welcoming visitors from my outer provinces for a time now. My
son takes care of these details now that I'm older. You haven't met my son? A fine boy.
Headstrong, perhaps. But then he's young. Do you care for a flavor capsule? No?"
Toran attempted an interruption, "Your imperial majesty–"
"Yes?"
"Your imperial majesty, it has not been our intention to intrude upon you–"
"Nonsense, there is no intrusion. Tonight there will be the official reception, but until then, we
are free. Let's see, where did you say you were from? It seems a long time since we had an
official reception. You said you were from the Province of Anacreon?"
"From the Foundation, your imperial majesty!"
"Yes, the Foundation. I remember now. I had it located. It is in the Province of Anacreon. I have
never been there. My doctor forbids extensive traveling. I don't recall any recent reports from
my viceroy at Anacreon. How are conditions there?" he concluded anxiously.
"Sire," mumbled Toran, "I bring no complaints."
"That is gratifying. I will commend my viceroy."
Toran looked helplessly at Ebling Mis, whose brusque voice rose. "Sire, we have been told that
it will require your permission for us to visit the Imperial University Library on Trantor."
"Trantor?" questioned the emperor, mildly, "Trantor?"
Then a look of puzzled pain crossed his thin face. "Trantor?" he whispered. "I remember now. I
am making plans now to return there with a flood of ships at my back. You shall come with me.
Together we will destroy the rebel, Gilmer. Together we shall restore the empire!"
His bent back had straightened. His voice had strengthened. For a moment his eyes were hard.
Then, he blinked and said softly, "But Gilmer is dead. I seem to remember – Yes. Yes! Gilmer
is dead! Trantor is dead – For a moment, it seemed – Where was it you said you came from?"
Magnifico whispered to Bayta, "Is this really an emperor? For somehow I thought emperors
were greater and wiser than ordinary men."
Bayta motioned him quiet. She said, "If your imperial majesty would but sign an order permitting
us to go to Trantor, it would avail greatly the common cause."
"To Trantor?" The emperor was blank and uncomprehending.
"Sire, the Viceroy of Anacreon, in whose name we speak, sends word that Gilmer is yet alive–"
"Alive! Alive!" thundered Dagobert. "Where? It will be war!"
"Your imperial majesty, it must not yet be known. His whereabouts are uncertain. The viceroy
sends us to acquaint you of the fact, and it is only on Trantor that we may find his hiding place.
Once discovered–"
"Yes, yes – He must be found–" The old emperor doddered to the wall and touched the little
photocell with a trembling finger. He muttered, after an ineffectual pause, "My servants do not
come. I can not wait for them."
He was scribbling on a blank sheet, and ended with a flourished "D." He said, "Gilmer will yet
learn the power of his emperor. Where was it you came from? Anacreon? What are the
conditions there? Is the name of the emperor powerful?"
Bayta took the paper from his loose fingers, "Your imperial majesty is beloved by the people.
Your love for them is widely known."
"I shall have to visit my good people of Anacreon, but my doctor says ... I don't remember what
he says, but–" He looked up, his old gray eyes sharp, "Were you saying something of Gilmer?"
"No, your imperial majesty."
"He shall not advance further. Go back and tell your people that. Trantor shall hold! My father
leads the fleet now, and the rebel vermin Gilmer shall freeze in space with his regicidal rabble."
He staggered into a seat and his eyes were blank once more. "What was I saying?"
Toran rose and bowed low, "Your imperial majesty has been kind to us, but the time allotted us
for an audience is over. "
For a moment, Dagobert IX looked like an emperor indeed as he rose and stood stiff-backed
while, one by one, his visitors retreated backward through the door
–to where twenty armed men intervened and locked a circle about them.
A hand-weapon flashed–
To Bayta, consciousness returned sluggishly, but without the "Where am I?" sensation. She
remembered clearly the odd old man who called himself emperor, and the other men who
waited outside. The arthritic tingle in her finger joints meant a stun pistol.
She kept her eyes closed, and listened with painful attention to the voices.
There were two of them. One was slow and cautious, with a slyness beneath the surface
obsequity. The other was hoarse and thick, almost sodden, and blurted out in viscous spurts.
Bayta liked neither.
The thick voice was predominant.
Bayta caught the last words, "He will live forever, that old madman. It wearies me. It annoys
me. Commason, I will have it. I grow older, too."
"Your highness, let us first see of what use these people are. It may be we shall have sources
of strength other than your father still provides."
The thick voice was lost in a bubbling whisper. Bayta caught only the phrase, " –the girl–" but
the other, fawning voice was a nasty, low, running chuckle followed by a comradely,
near-patronizing, "Dagobert, you do not age. They lie who say you are not a youth of twenty."
They laughed together, and Bayta's blood was an icy trickle. Dagobert – your highness – The
old emperor had spoken of a headstrong son, and the implication of the whispers now beat
dully upon her. But such things didn't happen to people in real life–
Toran's voice broke upon her in a slow, hard current of cursing.
She opened her eyes, and Toran's, which were upon her, showed open relief. He said, fiercely,
"This banditry will be answered by the emperor. Release us."
It dawned upon Bayta that her wrists and ankles were fastened to wall and floor by a tight
attraction field.
Thick Voice approached Toran. He was paunchy, his lower eyelids puffed darkly, and his hair
was thinning out. There was a gay feather in his peaked hat, and the edging of his doublet was
embroidered with silvery metal-foam.
He sneered with a heavy amusement. "The emperor? The poor, mad emperor?"
"I have his pass. No subject may hinder our freedom."
"But I am no subject, space-garbage. I am the regent and crown prince and am to be
addressed as such. As for my poor silly father, it amuses him to see visitors occasionally. And
we humor him. It tickles his mock-imperial fancy. But, of course, it has no other meaning."
And then he was before Bayta, and she looked up at him contemptuously. He leaned close and
his breath was overpoweringly minted.
He said, "Her eyes suit well, Commason – she is even prettier with them open. I think she'll do.
It will be an exotic dish for a jaded taste, eh?"
There was a futile surge upwards on Toran's part, which the crown prince ignored and Bayta
felt the iciness travel outward to the skin. Ebling Mis was still out; head lolling weakly upon his
chest, but, with a sensation of surprise, Bayta noted that Magnifico's eyes were open, sharply
open, as though awake for many minutes. Those large brown eyes swiveled towards Bayta and
stared at her out of a doughy face.
He whimpered, and nodded with his head towards the crown prince, "That one has my
Visi-Sonor."
The crown prince turned sharply toward the new voice, "This is yours, monster?" He swung the
instrument from his shoulder where it had hung, suspended by its green strap, unnoticed by
Bayta.
He fingered it clumsily, tried to sound a chord and got nothing for his pains, "Can you play it,
monster?"
Magnifico nodded once.
Toran said suddenly, "You've rifled a ship of the Foundation. If the emperor will not avenge, the
Foundation will."
It was the other, Commason, who answered slowly, "What Foundation? Or is the Mule no
longer the Mule?"
There was no answer to that. The prince's grin showed large uneven teeth. The clown's binding
field was broken and he was nudged ungently to his feet. The Visi-Sonor was thrust into his
hand.
"Play for us, monster," said the prince. "Play us a serenade of love and beauty for our foreign
lady here. Tell her that my father's country prison is no palace, but that I can take her to one
where she can swim in rose water – and know what a prince's love is. Sing of a prince's love,
monster."
He placed one thick thigh upon a marble table and swung a leg idly, while his fatuous smiling
stare swept Bayta into a silent rage. Toran's sinews strained against the field, in painful,
perspiring effort. Ebling Mis stirred and moaned.
Magnifico gasped, "My fingers are of useless stiffness–"
"Play, monster!" roared the prince. The lights dimmed at a gesture to Commason and in the
dimness he crossed his arms and waited.
Magnifico drew his fingers in rapid, rhythmic jumps from end to end of the multikeyed
instrument – and a sharp, gliding rainbow of light jumped across the room. A low, soft tone
sounded – throbbing, tearful. It lifted in sad laughter, and underneath it there sounded a dull
tolling.
The darkness seemed to intensify and grow thick. Music reached Bayta through the muffled
folds of invisible blankets. Gleaming light reached her from the depths as though a single
candle glowed at the bottom of a pit.
Automatically, her eyes strained. The light brightened, but remained blurred. It moved fuzzily, in
confused color, and the music was suddenly brassy, evil – flourishing in high crescendo. The
light flickered quickly, in swift motion to the wicked rhythm. Something writhed within the light.
Something with poisonous metallic scales writhed and yawned. And the music writhed and
yawned with it.
Bayta struggled with a strange emotion and then caught herself in a mental gasp. Almost, it
reminded her of the time in the Time Vault, of those last days on Haven. It was that horrible,
cloying, clinging spiderweb of horror and despair. She shrunk beneath it oppressed.
The music dinned upon her, laughing horribly, and the writhing terror at the wrong end of the
telescope in the small circle of light was lost as she turned feverishly away. Her forehead was
wet and cold.
The music died. It must have lasted fifteen minutes, and a vast pleasure at its absence flooded
Bayta. Light glared, and Magnifico's face was close to hers, sweaty, wild-eyed, lugubrious.
"My lady," he gasped, "how fare you?"
"Well enough," she whispered, "but why did you play like that?"
She became aware of the others in the room. Toran and Mis were limp and helpless against
the wall, but her eyes skimmed over them. There was the prince, lying strangely still at the foot
of the table. There was Commason, moaning wildly through an open, drooling mouth.
Commason flinched, and yelled mindlessly, as Magnifico took a step towards him.
Magnifico turned, and with a leap, turned the others loose.
Toran lunged upwards and with eager, taut fists seized the landowner by the neck, "You come
with us. We'll want you – to make sure we get to our ship."
Two hours later, in the ship's kitchen, Bayta served a walloping homemade pie, and Magnifico
celebrated the return to space by attacking it with a magnificent disregard of table manners.
"Good, Magnifico?"
"Um-m-m-m!"
"Magnifico?"
"Yes, my lady?"
"What was it you played back there?"
The clown writhed, "I ... I'd rather not say. I learned it once, and the Visi-Sonor is of an effect
upon the nervous system most profound. Surely, it was an evil thing, and not for your sweet
innocence, my lady."
"Oh, now, come, Magnifico. I'm not as innocent as that. Don't flatter so. Did I see anything like
what they saw?"
"I hope not. I played it for them only. If you saw, it was but the rim of it – from afar."
"And that was enough. Do you know you knocked the prince out?"
Magnifico spoke grimly through a large, muffling piece of pie. "I killed him, my lady."
"What?" She swallowed, painfully.
"He was dead when I stopped, or I would have continued. I cared not for Commason. His
greatest threat was death or torture. But, my lady, this prince looked upon you wickedly, and–"
he choked in a mixture of indignation and embarrassment.
Bayta felt strange thoughts come and repressed them sternly. "Magnifico, you've got a gallant
soul."
"Oh, my lady." He bent a red nose into his pie, but, somehow did not eat.
Ebling Mis stared out the port. Trantor was near – its metallic shine fearfully bright. Toran was
standing there, too.
He said with dull bitterness, "We've come for nothing, Ebling. The Mule's man precedes us."
Ebling Mis rubbed his forehead with a hand that seemed shriveled out of its former plumpness.
His voice was an abstracted mutter.
Toran was annoyed. "I say those people know the Foundation has fallen. I say–"
"Eh?" Mis looked up, puzzled. Then, he placed a gentle hand upon Toran's wrist, in complete
oblivion of any previous conversation, "Toran, I ... I've been looking at Trantor. Do you know ... I
have the queerest feeling ... ever since we arrived on Neotrantor. It's an urge, a driving urge
that's pushing and pushing inside. Toran, I can do it; I know I can do it. Things are becoming
clear in my mind – they have never been so clear."
Toran stared – and shrugged. The words brought him no confidence.
He said, tentatively, "Mis?"
"Yes?"
"You didn't see a ship come down on Neotrantor as we left?"
Consideration was brief. "No."
"I did. Imagination, I suppose, but it could have been that Filian ship."
"The one with Captain Han Pritcher on it?"
"The one with space knows who upon it. Magnifico's information – It followed us here, Mis."
Ebling Mis said nothing,
Toran said strenuously, "is there anything wrong with you? Aren't you well?"
Mis's eyes were thoughtful, luminous, and strange. He did not answer.
23. THE RUINS OF TRANTOR
The location of an objective upon the great world of Trantor presents a problem unique in the
Galaxy. There are no continents or oceans to locate from a thousand miles distance. There are
no rivers, lakes, and islands to catch sight of through the cloud rifts.
The metal-covered world was – had been – one colossal city, and only the old Imperial palace
could be identified readily from outer space by a stranger. The Bayta circled the world at almost
air-car height in repeated painful search.
From polar regions, where the icy coating of the metal spires were somber evidence of the
breakdown or neglect of the weather-conditioning machinery, they worked southwards.
Occasionally they could experiment with the correlations –(or presumable correlations)–
between what they saw and what the inadequate map obtained at Neotrantor showed.
But it was unmistakable when it came. The gap in the metal coat of the planet was fifty miles.
The unusual greenery spread over hundreds of square miles, inclosing the mighty grace of the
ancient Imperial residences.
The Bayta hovered and slowly oriented itself. There were only the huge supercauseways to
guide them. Long straight arrows on the map, smooth, gleaming ribbons there below them.
What the map indicated to be the University area was reached by dead reckoning, and upon
the flat area of what once must have been a busy landing-field, the ship lowered itself.
It was only as they submerged into the welter of metal that the smooth beauty apparent from
the air dissolved into the broken, twisted near-wreckage that had been left in the wake of the
Sack. Spires were truncated, smooth walls gouted and twisted, and just for an instant there was
the glimpse of a shaven area of earth – perhaps several hundred acres in extent – dark and
plowed.
Lee Senter waited as the ship settled downward cautiously. It was a strange ship, not from
Neotrantor, and inwardly he sighed. Strange ships and confused dealings with the men of outer
space could mean the end of the short days of peace, a return to the old grandiose times of
death and battle. Senter was leader of the group; the old books were in his charge and he had
read of those old days. He did not want them.
Perhaps ten minutes spent themselves as the strange ship came down to nestle upon the
flatness, but long memories telescoped themselves in that time. There was first the great farm
of his childhood – that remained in his mind merely as busy crowds of people. Then there was
the trek of the young families to new lands. He was ten, then; an only child, puzzled, and
frightened.
Then the new buildings; the great metal slabs to be uprooted and tom aside; the exposed soil
to be turned, and freshened, and invigorated; neighboring buildings to be tom down and
leveled; others to be transformed to living quarters.
There were crops to be grown and harvested; peaceful relations with neighboring farms to be
established–
There was growth and expansion, and the quiet efficiency of self-rule. There was the coming of
a new generation of hard, little youngsters born to the soil. There was the great day when he
was chosen leader of the Group and for the first time since his eighteenth birthday he did not
shave and saw the first stubble of his Leader's Beard appear.
And now the Galaxy might intrude and put an end to the brief idyll of isolation–
The ship landed. He watched wordlessly as the port opened. Four emerged, cautious and
watchful. There were three men, varied, old, young, thin and beaked. And a woman striding
among them like an equal. His hand left the two glassy black tufts of his beard as he stepped
forward.
He gave the universal gesture of peace. Both hands were before him; hard, calloused palms
upward.
The young man approached two steps and duplicated the gesture. "I come in peace."
The accent was strange, but the words were understandable, and welcome. He replied, deeply,
"In peace be it. You are welcome to the hospitality of the Group. Are you hungry? You shall eat.
Are you thirsty? You shall drink."
Slowly, the reply came, "We thank you for your kindness, and shall bear good report of your
Group when we return to our world."
A queer answer, but good. Behind him, the men of the Group were smiling, and from the
recesses of the surrounding structures, the women emerged.
In his own quarters, he removed the locked, mirror-walled box from its hidden place, and
offered each of the guests the long, plump cigars that were reserved for great occasions.
Before the woman, he hesitated. She had taken a seat among the men. The strangers
evidently allowed, even expected, such effrontery. Stiffly, he offered the box.
She accepted one with a smile, and drew in its aromatic smoke, with all the relish one could
expect. Lee Senter repressed a scandalized emotion.
The stiff conversation, in advance of the meal, touched politely upon the subject of fanning on
Trantor.
It was the old man who asked, "What about hydroponics? Surely, for such a world as Trantor,
hydroponics would be the answer."
Senter shook his head slowly. He felt uncertain. His knowledge was the unfamiliar matter of the
books he had read, "Artificial fanning in chemicals, I think? No, not on Trantor. This
hydroponics requires a world of industy – for instance, a great chemical industry. And in war or
disaster, when industry breaks down, the people starve. Nor can all foods be grown artificially.
Some lose their food value. The soil is cheaper, still better – always more dependable."
"And your food supply is sufficient?"
"Sufficient; perhaps monotonous. We have fowl that supply eggs, and milk-yielders for our dairy
products – but our meat supply rests upon our foreign trade."
"Trade." The young man seemed roused to sudden interest. "You trade then. But what do you
export?"
"Metal," was the curt answer. "Look for yourself. We have an infinite supply, ready processed.
They come from Neotrantor with ships, demolish an indicated area-increasing our growing
space – and leave us in exchange meat, canned fruit, food concentrates, farm machinery and
so on. They carry off the metal and both sides profit."
They feasted on bread and cheese, and a vegetable stew that was unreservedly delicious. It
was over the dessert of frosted fruit, the only imported item on the menu, that, for the first time,
the Outlanders became other than mere guests. The young man produced a map of Trantor.
Calmly, Lee Senter studied it. He listened – and said gravely, "The University Grounds are a
static area. We farmers do not grow crops on it. We do not, by preference, even enter it. It is
one of our few relics of another time we would keep undisturbed. "
"We are seekers after knowledge. We would disturb nothing. Our ship would be our hostage."
The old man offered this – eagerly, feverishly.
"I can take you there then," said Senter.
That night the strangers slept, and that night Lee Senter sent a message to Neotrantor.
24. CONVERT
The thin life of Trantor trickled to nothing when they entered among the wide-spaced buildings
of the University grounds. There was a solemn and lonely silence over it.
The strangers of the Foundation knew nothing of the swirling days and nights of the bloody
Sack that had left the University untouched. They knew nothing of the time after the collapse of
the Imperial power, when the students, with their borrowed weapons, and their pale-faced
inexperienced bravery, formed a protective volunteer army to protect the central shrine of the
science of the Galaxy. They knew nothing of the Seven Days Fight, and the armistice that kept
the University free, when even the Imperial palace clanged with the boots of Gilmer and his
soldiers, during the short interval of their rule.
Those of the Foundation, approaching for the first time, realized only that in a world of transition
from a gutted old to a strenuous new this area was a quiet, graceful museum-piece of ancient
greatness.
They were intruders in a sense. The brooding emptiness rejected them. The academic
atmosphere seemed still to live and to stir angrily at the disturbance.
The library was a deceptively small building which broadened out vastly underground into a
mammoth volume of silence and reverie. Ebling Mis paused before the elaborate murals of the
reception room.
He whispered – one had to whisper here: "I think we passed the catalog rooms back a way. I'll
stop there."
His forehead was flushed, his hand trembling, "I mustn't be disturbed, Toran. Will you bring my
meals down to me?"
"Anything you say. We'll do all we can to help. Do you want us to work under you–"
"No. I must be alone–"
"You think you will get what you want."
And Ebling Mis replied with a soft certainty, "I know I will!"
Toran and Bayta came closer to "setting up housekeeping" in normal fashion than at any time
in their year of married life. It was a strange sort of "housekeeping." They lived in the middle of
grandeur with an inappropriate simplicity. Their food was drawn largely from Lee Senter's farm
and was paid for in the little nuclear gadgets that may be found on any Trader's ship.
Magnifico taught himself how to use the projectors in the library reading room, and sat over
adventure novels and romances to the point where he was almost as forgetful of meals and
sleep as was Ebling Mis.
Ebling himself was completely buried. He had insisted on a hammock being slung up for him in
the Psychology Reference Room. His face grew thin and white. His vigor of speech was lost
and his favorite curses had died a mild death. There were times when the recognition of either
Toran or Bayta seemed a struggle.
He was more himself with Magnifico who brought him his meals and often sat watching him for
hours at a time, with a queer, fascinated absorption, as the aging psychologist transcribed
endless equations, cross-referred to endless book-films, scurried endlessly about in a wild
mental effort towards an end he alone saw.
Toran came upon her in the darkened room, and said sharply, "Bayta!"
Bayta started guiltily. "Yes? You want me, Torie?"
"Sure I want you. What in Space are you sitting there for? You've been acting all wrong since
we got to Trantor. What's the matter with you?"
"Oh, Torie, stop," she said, wearily.
And "Oh, Torie, stop!" he mimicked impatiently. Then, with sudden softness, "Won't you tell me
what's wrong, Bay? Something's bothering you."
"No! Nothing is, Torie. If you keep on just nagging and nagging, you'll have me mad. I'm just –
thinking."
"Thinking about what?"
"About nothing. Well, about the Mule, and Haven, and the Foundation, and everything. About
Ebling Mis and whether he'll find anything about the Second Foundation, and whether it will
help us when he does find it – and a million other things. Are you satisfied?" Her voice was
agitated.
"If you're just brooding, do you mind stopping? It isn't pleasant and it doesn't help the situation."
Bayta got to her feet and smiled weakly. "All right. I'm happy. See, I'm smiling and jolly. "
Magnifico's voice was an agitated cry outside. "My lady–"
"What is it? Come–"
Bayta's voice choked off sharply when the opening door framed the large, hard-faced–
"Pritcher," cried Toran.
Bayta gasped, "Captain! How did you find us?"
Han Pritcher stepped inside. His voice was clear and level, and utterly dead of feeling, "My rank
is colonel now – under the Mule."
"Under the ... Mule!" Toran's voice trailed off. They formed a tableau there, the three.
Magnifico stared wildly and shrank behind Toran. Nobody stopped to notice him.
Bayta said, her hands trembling in each other's tight grasp, "You are arresting us? You have
really gone over to them?"
The colonel replied quickly, "I have not come to arrest you. My instructions make no mention of
you. With regard to you, I am free, and I choose to exercise our old friendship, if you will let
me."
Toran's face was a twisted suppression of fury, "How did you find us? You were in the Filian
ship, then? You followed us?"
The wooden lack of expression on Pritcher's face might have flickered in embarrassment. "I
was on the Filian ship! I met you in the first place ... well ... by chance."
"It is a chance that is mathematically impossible."
"No. Simply rather improbable, so my statement will have to stand. In any case, you admitted to
the. Filians – there is, of course, no such nation as Filia actually – that you were heading for the
Trantor sector, and since the Mule already had his contacts upon Neotrantor, it was easy to
have you detained there. Unfortunately, you got away before I arrived, but not long before. I
had time to have the farms on Trantor ordered to report your arrival. It was done and I am here.
May I sit down? I come in friendliness, believe me.
He sat. Toran bent his head and thought futilely. With a numbed lack of emotion, Bayta
prepared tea.
Toran looked up harshly. "Well, what are you waiting for – colonel? What's your friendship? If
it's not arrest, what is it then? Protective custody? Call in your men and give your orders."
Patiently, Pritcher shook his head. "No, Toran. I come of my own will to speak to you, to
persuade you of the uselessness of what you are doing. If I fail I shall leave. That is all."
"That is all? Well, then peddle your propaganda, give us your speech, and leave. I don't want
any tea, Bayta."
Pritcher accepted a cup, with a grave word of thanks. He looked at Toran with a clear strength
as he sipped lightly. Then he said, "The Mule is a mutant. He can not be beaten in the very
nature of the mutation–"
"Why? What is the mutation?" asked Toran, with sour humor. "I suppose you'll tell us now, eh?"
"Yes, I will. Your knowledge won't hurt him. You see – he is capable of adjusting the emotional
balance of human beings. It sounds like a little trick, but it's quite unbeatable."
Bayta broke in, "The emotional balance?" She frowned, "Won't you explain that? I don't quite
understand."
"I mean that it is an easy matter for him to instill into a capable general, say, the emotion of
utter loyalty to the Mule and complete belief in the Mule's victory. His generals are emotionally
controlled. They can not betray him; they can not weaken – and the control is permanent. His
most capable enemies become his most faithful subordinates, The warlord of Kalgan
surrenders his planet and becomes his viceroy for the Foundation."
"And you," added Bayta, bitterly, "betray your cause and become Mule's envoy to Trantor. I
see!"
"I haven't finished. The Mule's gift works in reverse even more effectively. Despair is an
emotion! At the crucial moment, keymen on the Foundation – keymen on Haven – despaired.
Their worlds fell without too much struggle."
"Do you mean to say," demanded Bayta, tensely, "that the feeling I had in the Time Vault was
the Mule juggling my emotional control."
"Mine, too. Everyone's. How was it on Haven towards the end?"
Bayta turned away.
Colonel Pritcher continued earnestly, "As it works for worlds, so it works for individuals. Can
you fight a force which can make you surrender willingly when it so desires; can make you a
faithful servant when it so desires?"
Toran said slowly, "How do I know this is the truth?"
"Can you explain the fall of the Foundation and of Haven otherwise? Can you explain my
conversion otherwise? Think, man! What have you – or I – or the whole Galaxy accomplished
against the Mule in all this time? What one little thing?"
Toran felt the challenge, "By the Galaxy, I can!" With a sudden touch of fierce satisfaction, he
shouted, "Your wonderful Mule had contacts with Neotrantor you say that were to have
detained us, eh? Those contacts are dead or worse. We killed the crown prince and left the
other a whimpering idiot. The Mule did not stop us there, and that much has been undone."
"Why, no, not at all. Those weren't our men. The crown prince was a wine-soaked mediocrity.
The other man, Commason, is phenomenally stupid. He was a power on his world but that
didn't prevent him from being vicious, evil, and completely incompetent. We had nothing really
to do with them. They were, in a sense, merely feints–"
"It was they who detained us, or tried."
"Again, no. Commason had a personal slave – a man called Inchney. Detention was his policy.
He is old, but will serve our temporary purpose. You would not have killed him, you see."
Bayta whirled on him. She had not touched her own tea. "But, by your very statement, your own
emotions have been tampered with. You've got faith and belief in the Mule, an unnatural, a
diseased faith in the Mule. Of what value are your opinions? You've lost all power of objective
thought."
"You are wrong." Slowly, the colonel shook his head. "Only my emotions are fixed. My reason
is as it always was. It may be influenced in a certain direction by my conditioned emotions, but
it is not forced. And there are some things I can see more clearly now that I am freed of my
earlier emotional trend.
"I can see that the Mule's program is an intelligent and worthy one. In the time since I have
been – converted, I have followed his career from its start seven years ago. With his mutant
mental power, he began by winning over a condottiere and his band. With that – and his power
– he won a planet. With that – and his power – he extended his grip until he could tackle the
warlord of Kalgan. Each step followed the other logically. With Kalgan in his pocket, he had a
first-class fleet, and with that – and his power – he could attack the Foundation.
"The Foundation is the key. It is the greatest area of industrial concentration in the Galaxy, and
now that the nuclear techniques of the Foundation are in his hands, he is the actual master of
the Galaxy. With those techniques – and his power – he can force the remnants of the Empire
to acknowledge his rule, and eventually – with the death of the old emperor, who is mad and
not long for this world – to crown him emperor. He will then have the name as well as the fact.
With that – and his power – where is the world in the Galaxy that can oppose him?
"In these last seven years, he has established a new Empire. In seven years, in other words, he
will have accomplished what all Seldon's psychohistory could not have done in less than an
additional seven hundred. The Galaxy will have peace and order at last.
"And you could not stop it – any more than you could stop a planet's rush with your shoulders."
A long silence followed Pritcher's speech. What remained of his tea had grown cold. He
emptied his cup, filled it again, and drained it slowly. Toran bit viciously at a thumbnail. Bayta's
face was cold, and distant, and white.
Then Bayta said in a thin voice, "We are not convinced. If the Mule wishes us to be, let him
come here and condition us himself. You fought him until the last moment of your conversion, I
imagine, didn't you?"
"I did," said Colonel Pritcher, solemnly.
"Then allow us the same privilege."
Colonel Pritcher arose. With a crisp air of finality, he said, "Then I leave. As I said earlier, my
mission at present concerns you in no way. Therefore, I don't think it will be necessary to report
your presence here. That is not too great a kindness. If the Mule wishes you stopped, he no
doubt has other men assigned to the job, and you will be stopped. But, for what it is worth, I
shall not contribute more than my requirement."
"Thank you," said Bayta faintly.
"As for Magnifico. Where is he? Come out, Magnifico, I won't hurt you–"
"What about him?" demanded Bayta, with sudden animation.
"Nothing. My instructions make no mention of him, either. I have heard that he is searched for,
but the Mule will find him when the time suits him. I shall say nothing. Will you shake hands?"
Bayta shook her head. Toran glared his frustrated contempt.
There was the slightest lowering of the colonel's iron shoulders. He strode to the door, turned
and said:
"One last thing. Don't think I am not aware of the source of your stubbornness. It is known that
you search for the Second Foundation. The Mule, in his time, will take his measures. Nothing
will help you – But I knew you in other times; perhaps there is something in my conscience that
urged me to this; at any rate, I tried to help you and remove you from the final danger before it
was too late. Good-by."
He saluted sharply – and was gone.
Bayta turned to a silent Toran, and whispered, "They even know about the Second
Foundation."
In the recesses of the library, Ebling Mis, unaware of all, crouched under the one spark of light
amid the murky spaces and mumbled triumphantly to himself.
25. DEATH OF A PSYCHOLOGIST
After that there were only two weeks left to the life of Ebling Mis.
And in those two weeks, Bayta was with him three times. The first time was on the night after
the evening upon which they saw Colonel Pritcher. The second was one week later. And the
third was again a week later – on the last day – the day Mis died.
First, there was the night of Colonel Pritcher's evening, the first hour of which was spent by a
stricken pair in a brooding, unmerry merry-go-round.
Bayta said, "Torie, let's tell Ebling."
Toran said dully, "Think he can help?"
"We're only two. We've got to take some of the weight off. Maybe he can help."
Toran said, "He's changed. He's lost weight. He's a little feathery; a little woolly." His fingers
groped in air, metaphorically. "Sometimes, I don't think he'll help us muchever. Sometimes, I
don't think anything will help."
"Don't!" Bayta's voice caught and escaped a break, "Torie, don't! When you say that, I think the
Mule's getting us. Let's tell Ebling, Torie – now!"
Ebling Mis raised his head from the long desk, and bleared at them as they approached. His
thinning hair was scuffed up, his lips made sleepy, smacking sounds.
"Eh?" he said. "Someone want me?"
Bayta bent to her knees, "Did we wake you? Shall we leave?"
"Leave? Who is it? Bayta? No, no, stay! Aren't there chairs? I saw them–" His finger pointed
vaguely.
Toran pushed two ahead of him. Bayta sat down and took one of the psychologist's flaccid
hands in hers. "May we talk to you, Doctor?" She rarely used the title.
"Is something wrong?" A little sparkle returned to his abstracted eyes. His sagging cheeks
regained a touch of color. "Is something wrong?"
Bayta said, "Captain Pritcher has been here. Let me talk, Torie. You remember Captain
Pritcher, Doctor?"
"Yes– Yes–" His fingers pinched his lips and released them. "Tall man. Democrat."
"Yes, he. He's discovered the Mule's mutation. He was here, Doctor, and told us."
"But that is nothing new. The Mule's mutation is straightened out." In honest astonishment,
"Haven't I told you? Have I forgotten to tell you?"
"Forgotten to tell us what?" put in Toran, quickly.
"About the Mule's mutation, of course. He tampers with emotions. Emotional control! I haven't
told you? Now what made me forget?" Slowly, he sucked in his under lip and considered.
Then, slowly, life crept into his voice and his eyelids lifted wide, as though his sluggish brain
had slid onto a well-greased single track. He spoke in a dream, looking between the two
listeners rather than at them. "It is really so simple. It requires no specialized knowledge. In the
mathematics of psychohistory, of course, it works out promptly, in a third-level equation
involving no more – Never mind that. It can be put into ordinary words – roughly – and have it
make sense, which isn't usual with psychohistorical phenomena.
"Ask yourselves – What can upset Hari Seldon's careful scheme of history, eh?" He peered
from one to the other with a mild, questioning anxiety. "What were Seldon's original
assumptions? First, that there would be no fundamental change in human society over the next
thousand years.
"For instance, suppose there were a major change in the Galaxy's technology, such as finding
a new principle for the utilization of energy, or perfecting the study of electronic neurobiology.
Social changes would render Seldon's original equations obsolete. But that hasn't happened,
has it now?"
"Or suppose that a new weapon were to be invented by forces outside the Foundation, capable
of withstanding all the Foundation's armaments. That might cause a ruinous deviation, though
less certainly. But even that hasn't happened. The Mule's Nuclear Field-Depressor was a
clumsy weapon and could be countered. And that was the only novelty he presented, poor as it
was.
"But there was a second assumption, a more subtle one! Seldon assumed that human reaction
to stimuli would remain constant. Granted that the first assumption held true, then the second
must have broken down! Some factor must be twisting and distorting the emotional responses
of human beings or Seldon couldn't have failed and the Foundation couldn't have fallen. And
what factor but the Mule?
"Am I right? Is there a flaw in the reasoning?"
Bayta's plump hand patted his gently. "No flaw, Ebling."
Mis was joyful, like a child. "This and more comes so easily. I tell you I wonder sometimes what
is going on inside me. I seem to recall the time when so much was a mystery to me and now
things are so clear. Problems are absent. I come across what might be one, and somehow,
inside me, I see and understand. And my guesses, my theories seem always to be borne out.
There's a drive in me ... always onward ... so that I can't stop ... and I don't want to eat or sleep
... but always go on ... and on ... and on–"
His voice was a whisper; his wasted, blue-veined hand rested tremblingly upon his forehead.
There was a frenzy in his eyes that faded and went out.
He said more quietly, "Then I never told you about the Mule's mutant powers, did I? But then ...
did you say you knew about it?"
"It was Captain Pritcher, Ebling," said Bayta. "Remember?"
"He told you?" There was a tinge of outrage in his tone. "But how did he find out?"
"He's been conditioned by the Mule. He's a colonel now, a Mule's man. He came to advise us
to surrender to the Mule, and he told us – what you told us."
"Then the Mule knows we're here? I must hurry – Where's Magnifico? Isn't he with you?"
"Magnifico's sleeping," said Toran, impatiently. "It's past midnight, you know."
"It is? Then – Was I sleeping when you came in?"
"You were," said Bayta decisively, "and you're not going back to work, either. You're getting into
bed. Come on, Torie, help me. And you stop pushing at me, Ebling, because it's just your luck I
don't shove you under a shower first. Pull off his shoes, Torie, and tomorrow you come down
here and drag him out into the open air before he fades completely away. Look at you, Ebling,
you'll be growing cobwebs. Are you hungry?"
Ebling Mis shook his head and looked up from his cot in a peevish confusion. "I want you to
send Magnifico down tomorrow," he muttered.
Bayta tucked the sheet around his neck. "You'll have me down tomorrow, with washed clothes.
You're going to take a good bath, and then get out and visit the farm and feel a little sun on
you."
"I won't do it," said Mis weakly. "You hear me? I'm too busy."
His sparse hair spread out on the pillow like a silver fringe about his head. His voice was a
confidential whisper. "You want that Second Foundation, don't you?"
Toran turned quickly and squatted down on the cot beside him. "What about the Second
Foundation, Ebling?"
The psychologist freed an arm from beneath the sheet and his tired fingers clutched at Toran's
sleeve. "The Foundations were established at a great Psychological Convention presided over
by Hari Seldon. Toran, I have located the published minutes of that Convention. Twenty-five fat
films. I have already looked through various summaries."
"Well?"
"Well, do you know that it is very easy to find from them the exact location of the First
Foundation, if you know anything at all about psychohistory. It is frequently referred to, when
you understand the equations. But Toran, nobody mentions the Second Foundation, There has
been no reference to it anywhere."
Toran's eyebrows pulled into a frown. "It doesn't exist?"
"Of course it exists," cried Mis, angrily, "who said it didn't? But there's less talk of it. Its
significance – and all about it – are better hidden, better obscured. Don't you see? It's the more
important of the two. It's the critical one; the one that counts! And I've got the minutes of the
Seldon Convention. The Mule hasn't won yet–"
Quietly, Bayta turned the lights down. "Go to sleep!"
Without speaking, Toran and Bayta made their way up to their own quarters.
The next day, Ebling Mis bathed and dressed himself, saw the sun of Trantor and felt the wind
of Trantor for the last time. At the end of the day he was once again submerged in the gigantic
recesses of the library, and never emerged thereafter.
In the week that followed, life settled again into its groove. The sun of Neotrantor was a calm,
bright star in Trantor's night sky. The farm was busy with its spring planting. The University
grounds were silent in their desertion. The Galaxy seemed empty. The Mule might never have
existed.
Bayta was thinking that as she watched Toran light his cigar carefully and look up at the
sections of blue sky visible between the swarming metal spires that encircled the horizon.
"It's a nice day," he said.
"Yes, it is. Have you everything mentioned on the list, Torie?"
"Sure. Half pound butter, dozen eggs, string beans – Got it all down here, Bay. I'll have it right."
"Good. And make sure the vegetables are of the last harvest and not museum relics. Did you
see Magnifico anywhere, by the way?"
"Not since breakfast. Guess he's down with Ebling, watching a book-film."
"All right. Don't waste any time, because I'll need the eggs for dinner."
Toran left with a backward smile and a wave of the hand.
Bayta turned away as Toran slid out of sight among the maze of metal. She hesitated before
the kitchen door, about-faced slowly, and entered the colonnade leading to the elevator that
burrowed down into the recesses.
Ebling Mis was there, head bent down over the eyepieces of the projector, motionless, a
frozen, questing body. Near him sat Magnifico, screwed up into a chair, eyes sharp and
watching – a bundle of slatty limbs with a nose emphasizing his scrawny face.
Bayta said softly, "Magnifico–"
Magnifico scrambled to his feet. His voice was an eager whisper. "My lady!"
"Magnifico," said Bayta, "Toran has left for the farm and won't be back for a while. Would you
be a good boy and go out after him with a message that I'll write for you?"
"Gladly, my lady. My small services are but too eagerly yours, for the tiny uses you can put
them to."
She was alone with Ebling Mis, who had not moved. Firmly, she placed her hand upon his
shoulder. "Ebling–"
The psychologist started, with a peevish cry, "What is it?" He wrinkled his eyes. "Is it you,
Bayta? Where's Magnifico?"
"I sent him away. I want to be alone with you for a while." She enunciated her words with
exaggerated distinctness. "I want to talk to you, Ebling."
The psychologist made a move to return to his projector, but her hand on his shoulder was firm.
She felt the bone under the sleeve clearly. The flesh seemed to have fairly melted away since
their arrival on Trantor. His face was thin, yellowish, and bore a half-week stubble. His
shoulders were visibly stooped, even in a sitting position.
Bayta said, "Magnifico isn't bothering you, is he, Ebling? He seems to be down here night and
day."
"No, no, no! Not at all. Why, I don't mind him. He is silent and never disturbs me. Sometimes he
carries the films back and forth for me; seems to know what I want without my speaking. Just
let him be."
"Very well – but, Ebling, doesn't he make you wonder? Do you hear me, Ebling? Doesn't he
make you wonder?"
She jerked a chair close to his and stared at him as though to pull the answer out of his eyes.
Ebling Mis shook his head. "No. What do you mean?"
"I mean that Colonel Pritcher and you both say the Mule can condition the emotions of human
beings. But are you sure of it? Isn't Magnifico himself a flaw in the theory?"
There was silence.
Bayta repressed a strong desire to shake the psychologist. "What's wrong with you, Ebling?
Magnifico was the Mule's clown. Why wasn't he conditioned to love and faith? Why should he,
of all those in contact with the Mule, hate him so.
"But ... but he was conditioned. Certainly, Bay!" He seemed to gather certainty as he spoke.
"Do you suppose that the Mule treats his clown the way he treats his generals? He needs faith
and loyalty in the latter, but in his clown he needs only fear. Didn't you ever notice that
Magnifico's continual state of panic is pathological in nature? Do you suppose it is natural for a
human being to be as frightened as that all the time? Fear to such an extent becomes comic. It
was probably comic to the Mule – and helpful, too, since it obscured what help we might have
gotten earlier from Magnifico."
Bayta said, "You mean Magnifico's information about the Mule was false?"
"it was misleading. It was colored by pathological fear. The Mule is not the physical giant
Magnifico thinks. He is more probably an ordinary man outside his mental powers. But if it
amused him to appear a superman to poor Magnifico–" The psychologist shrugged. "In any
case, Magnifico's information is no longer of importance."
"What is, then?"
But Mis shook himself loose and returned to his projector.
"What is, then?" she repeated. "The Second Foundation?"
The psychologist's eyes jerked towards her. "Have I told you anything about that? I don't
remember telling you anything. I'm not ready yet. What have I told you?"
"Nothing," said Bayta, intensely. "Oh, Galaxy, you've told me nothing, but I wish you would
because I'm deathly tired. When will it be over?"
Ebling Mis peered at her, vaguely rueful, "Well, now, my ... my dear, I did not mean to hurt you.
I forget sometimes ... who my friends are. Sometimes it seems to me that I must not talk of all
this. There's a need for secrecy – but from the Mule, not from you, my dear." He patted her
shoulder with a weak amiability.
She said, "What about the Second Foundation?"
His voice was automatically a whisper, thin and sibilant. "Do you know the thoroughness with
which Seldon covered his traces? The proceedings of the Seldon Convention would have been
of no use to me at a as little as a month ago, before this strange insight came. Even now, it
seems – tenuous. The papers put out by the Convention are often apparently unrelated; always
obscure. More than once I wondered if the members of the Convention, themselves, knew all
that was in Seldon's mind. Sometimes I think he used the Convention only as a gigantic front,
and single-handed erected the structure–"
"Of the Foundations?" urged Bayta.
"Of the Second Foundation! Our Foundation was simple. But the Second Foundation was only
a name. It was mentioned, but if there was any elaboration, it was hidden deep in the
mathematics. There is still much I don't even begin to understand, but for seven days, the bits
have been clumping together into a vague picture.
"Foundation Number One was a world of physical scientists. It represented a concentration of
the dying science of the Galaxy under the conditions necessary to make it live again. No
psychologists were included. It was a peculiar distortion, and must have had a purpose. The
usual explanation was that Seldon's psychohistory worked best where the individual working
units – human beings – had no knowledge of what was coming, and could therefore react
naturally to all situations. Do you follow me, my dear–"
"Yes, doctor."
"Then listen carefully. Foundation Number Two was a world of mental scientists. It was the
mirror image of our world. Psychology, not physics, was king." Triumphantly. "You see?"
"I don't."
"But think, Bayta, use your head. Hari Seldon knew that his psychohistory could predict only
probabilities, and not certainties. There was always a margin of error, and as time passed that
margin increases in geometric progression. Seldon would naturally guard as well as he could
against it. Our Foundation was scientifically vigorous. It could conquer armies and weapons. It
could pit force against force. But what of the mental attack of a mutant such as the Mule?"
"That would be for the psychologists of the Second Foundation!" Bayta felt excitement rising
within her.
"Yes, yes, yes! Certainly!"
"But they have done nothing so far."
"How do you know they haven't?"
Bayta considered that, "I don't. Do you have evidence that they have?"
"No. There are many factors I know nothing of. The Second Foundation could not have been
established full-grown, any more than we were. We developed slowly and grew in strength;
they must have also. The stars know at what stage their strength is now. Are they strong
enough to fight the Mule? Are they aware of the danger in the first place? Have they capable
leaders?"
"But if they follow Seldon's plan, then the Mule must be beaten by the Second Foundation."
"Ah," and Ebling Mis's thin face wrinkled thoughtfully, "is it that again? But the Second
Foundation was a more difficult job than the First. Its complexity is hugely greater; and
consequently so is its possibility of error. And if the Second Foundation should not beat the
Mule, it is bad – ultimately bad. It is the end, may be, of the human race as we know it."
"No.
"Yes. If the Mule's descendants inherit his mental powers – You see? Homo sapiens could not
compete. There would be a new dominant race – a new aristocracy – with homo sapiens
demoted to slave labor as an inferior race. Isn't that so?"
"Yes, that is so."
"And even if by some chance the Mule did not establish a dynasty, he would still establish a
distorted new Empire upheld by his personal power only. It would die with his death; the Galaxy
would be left where it was before he came, except that there would no longer be Foundations
around which a real and healthy Second Empire could coalesce. It would mean thousands of
years of barbarism. It would mean no end in sight."
"What can we do? Can we warn the Second Foundation?"
"We must, or they may go under through ignorance, which we can not risk. But there is no way
of warning them."
"No way?"
"I don't know where they are located. They are 'at the other end of the Galaxy' but that is all,
and there are millions of worlds to choose from."
"But, Ebling, don't they say?" She pointed vaguely at the films that covered the table.
"No, they don't. Not where I can find it – yet. The secrecy must mean something. There must
be a reason–" A puzzled expression returned to his eyes. "But I wish you'd leave. I have
wasted enough time, and it's growing short – it's growing short."
He tore away, petulant and frowning.
Magnifico's soft step approached. "Your husband is home, my lady."
Ebling Mis did not greet the clown. He was back at his projector.
That evening Toran, having listened, spoke, "And you think he's really right, Bay? You think he
isn't–" He hesitated.
"He is right, Torie. He's sick, I know that. The change that's come over him, the loss in weight,
the way he speaks – he's sick. But as soon as the subject of the Mule or the Second
Foundation, or anything he is working on, comes up, listen to him. He is lucid and clear as the
sky of outer space. He knows what he's talking about. I believe him."
"Then there's hope." It was half a question.
"I ... I haven't worked it out. Maybe! Maybe not! I'm carrying a blaster from now on." The
shiny-barreled weapon was in her hand as she spoke. "Just in case, Torie, just in case."
"In case what?"
Bayta laughed with a touch of hysteria, "Never mind. Maybe I'm a little crazy, too – like Ebling
Mis."
Ebling Mis at that time had seven days to live, and the seven days slipped by, one after the
other, quietly.
To Toran, there was a quality of stupor about them. The warming days and the dull silence
covered him with lethargy. All life seemed to have lost its quality of action, and changed into an
infinite sea of hibernation.
Mis was a hidden entity whose burrowing work produced nothing and did not make itself
known. He had barricaded himself. Neither Toran nor Bayta could see him. Only Magnifico's
go-between characteristics were evidence of his existence. Magnifico, grown silent and
thoughtful, with his tiptoed trays of food and his still, watchful witness in the gloom.
Bayta was more and more a creature of herself. The vivacity died, the self-assured competence
wavered. She, too, sought her own worried, absorbed company, and once Toran bad come
upon her, fingering her blaster. She had put it away quickly, forced a smile.
"What are you doing with it, Bay?"
"Holding it. Is that a crime?"
"You'll blow your fool head off."
"Then I'll blow it off. Small loss!"
Married life had taught Toran the futility of arguing with a female in a dark-brown mood. He
shrugged, and left her.
On the last day, Magnifico scampered breathless into their presence. He clutched at them,
frightened. "The learned doctor calls for you. He is not well."
And he wasn't well. He was in bed, his eyes unnaturally large, unnaturally bright. He was dirty,
unrecognizable.
"Ebling!" cried Bayta.
"Let me speak," croaked the psychologist, lifting his weight to a thin elbow with an effort. "Let
me speak. I am finished; the work I pass on to you. I have kept no notes; the scrap-figures I
have destroyed. No other must know. All must remain in your minds."
"Magnifico," said Bayta, with rough directness. "Go upstairs!"
Reluctantly, the clown rose and took a backward step. His sad eyes were on Mis.
Mis gestured weakly, "He won't matter; let him stay. Stay, Magnifico."
The clown sat down quickly. Bayta gazed at the floor.
Slowly, slowly, her lower lip caught in her teeth.
Mis said, in a hoarse whisper, "I am convinced the Second Foundation can win, if it is not
caught prematurely by the Mule. It has kept itself secret; the secrecy must be upheld; it has a
purpose. You must go there; your information is vital ... may make all the difference. Do you
hear me?"
Toran cried in near-agony, "Yes, yes! Tell us how to get there, Ebling? Where is it?"
"I can tell you," said the faint voice.
He never did.
Bayta, face frozen white, lifted her blaster and shot, with an echoing clap of noise. From the
waist upward, Mis was not, and a ragged hole was in the wall behind. From numb fingers,
Bayta's blaster dropped to the floor.
26. END OF THE SEARCH
There was not a word to be said. The echoes of the blast rolled away into the outer rooms and
rumbled downward into a hoarse, dying whisper. Before its death, it had muffled the sharp
clamor of Bayta's falling blaster, smothered Magnifico's high-pitched cry, drowned out Toran's
inarticulate roar.
There was a silence of agony.
Bayta's head was bent into obscurity. A droplet caught the light as it fell. Bayta had never wept
since her childhood.
Toran's muscles almost cracked in their spasm, but he did not relax – he felt as if he would
never unclench his teeth again. Magnifico's face was a faded, lifeless mask.
Finally, from between teeth still tight, Toran choked out in an unrecognizable voice, "You're a
Mule's woman, then. He got to you!"
Bayta looked up, and her mouth twisted with a painful merriment, "I, a Mule's woman? That's
ironic."
She smiled – a brittle effort – and tossed her hair back. Slowly, her voice verged back to the
normal, or something near it. "It's over, Toran; I can talk now. How much I will survive, I don't
know. But I can start talking–"
Toran's tension had broken of its own weight and faded into a flaccid dullness, "Talk about
what, Bay? What's there to talk about?"
"About the calamity that's followed us. We've remarked about it before, Torie. Don't you
remember? How defeat has always bitten at our heels and never actually managed to nip us?
We were on the Foundation, and it collapsed while the Independent Traders still fought – but
we got out in time to go to Haven. We were on Haven, and it collapsed while the others still
fought – and again we got out in time. We went to Neotrantor, and by now it's undoubtedly
joined the Mule."
Toran listened and shook his head, "I don't understand."
"Torie, such things don't happen in real life. You and I are insignificant people; we don't fall from
one vortex of politics into another continuously for the space of a year – unless we carry the
vortex with us. Unless we carry the source of infection with us! Now do you see?"
Toran's lips tightened. His glance fixed horribly upon the bloody remnants of what had once
been a human, and his eyes sickened.
"Let's get out of here, Bay. Let's get out into the open."
It was cloudy outside. The wind scudded about them in drab spurts and disordered Bayta's hair.
Magnifico had crept after them and now he hovered at the edge of their conversation.
Toran said tightly, "You killed Ebling Mis because you believed him to be the focus of
infection?" Something in her eyes struck him. He whispered, "He was the Mule?" He did not –
could not – believe the implications of his own words.
Bayta laughed sharply, "Poor Ebling the Mule? Galaxy, no! I couldn't have killed him if he were
the Mule. He would have detected the emotion accompanying the move and changed it for me
to love, devotion, adoration, terror, whatever he pleased. No, I killed Ebling because he was not
the Mule. I killed him because he knew where the Second Foundation was, and in two seconds
would have told the Mule the secret."
"Would have told the Mule the secret," Toran repeated stupidly. "Told the Mule–"
And then he emitted a sharp cry, and turned to stare in horror at the clown, who might have
been crouching unconscious there for the apparent understanding he had of what he heard.
"Not Magnifico?" Toran whispered the question.
"Listen!" said Bayta. "Do you remember what happened on Neotrantor? Oh, think for yourself,
Torie–"
But he shook his head and mumbled at her.
She went on, wearily, "A man died on Neotrantor. A man died with no one touching him. Isn't
that true? Magnifico played on his Visi-Sonor and when he was finished, the crown prince was
dead. Now isn't that strange? Isn't it queer that a creature afraid of everything, apparently
helpless with terror, has the capacity to kill at will."
"The music and the light-effects," said Toran, "have a profound emotional effect–"
"Yes, an emotional effect. A pretty big one. Emotional effects happen to be the Mule's specialty.
That, I suppose, can be considered a coincidence. And a creature who can kill by suggestion is
so full of fright. Well, the Mule tampered with his mind, supposedly, so that can be explained.
But, Toran, I caught a little of that Visi-Sonor selection that killed the crown prince. Just a little –
but it was enough to give me that same feeling of despair I had in the Time Vault and on
Haven. Toran, I can't mistake that particular feeling."
Toran's face was darkening. "I ... felt it, too. I forgot. I never thought–"
"It was then that it first occurred to me. It was just a vague feeling – intuition, if you like. I had
nothing to go on. And then Pritcher told us of the Mule and his mutation, and it was clear in a
moment. It was the Mule who had created the despair in the Time Vault; it was Magnifico who
had created the despair on Neotrantor. It was the same emotion. Therefore, the Mule and
Magnifico were the same person. Doesn't it work out nicely, Torie? Isn't it just like an axiom in
geometry – things equal to the same thing are equal to each other?"
She was at the edge of hysteria, but dragged herself back to sobriety by main force. She
continued, "The discovery scared me to death. If Magnifico were the Mule, he could know my
emotions – and cure them for his own purposes. I dared not let him know. I avoided him.
Luckily, he avoided me also; he was too interested in Ebling Mis. I planned killing Mis before he
could talk. I planned it secretly – as secretly as I could – so secretly I didn't dare tell it to myself.
"If I could have killed the Mule himself – But I couldn't take the chance. He would have noticed,
and I would have lost everything."
She seemed drained of emotion.
Toran said harshly and with finality, "It's impossible. Look at the miserable creature. He the
Mule? He doesn't even hear what we're saying."
But when his eyes followed his pointing finger, Magnifico was erect and alert, his eyes sharp
and darkly bright. His voice was without a trace of an accent, "I hear her, my friend. It is merely
that I have been sitting here and brooding on the fact that with all my cleverness and
forethought I could make a mistake, and lose so much."
Toran stumbled backward as if afraid the clown might touch him or that his breath might
contaminate him.
Magnifico nodded, and answered the unspoken question. "I am the Mule."
He seemed no longer a grotesque; his pipestem limbs, his beak of a nose lost their
humor-compelling qualities. His fear was gone; his bearing was firm.
He was in command of the situation with an ease born of usage.
He said, tolerantly, "Seat yourselves. Go ahead; you might as well sprawl out and make
yourselves comfortable. The game's over, and I'd like to tell you a story. It's a weakness of
mine – I want people to understand me."
And his eyes as he looked at Bayta were still the old, soft sad brown ones of Magnifico, the
clown.
"There is nothing really to my childhood," he began, plunging bodily into quick, impatient
speech, "that I care to remember. Perhaps you can understand that. My meagerness is
glandular; my nose I was born with. It was not possible for me to lead a normal childhood. My
mother died before she saw me. I do not know my father. I grew up haphazard, wounded and
tortured in mind, full of self-pity and hatred of others. I was known then as a queer child. All
avoided me; most out of dislike; some out of fear. Queer incidents occurred – Well, never mind!
Enough happened to enable Captain Pritcher, in his investigation of my childhood to realize
that I was a mutant, which was more than I ever realized until I was in my twenties."
Toran and Bayta listened distantly. The wash of his voice broke over them, seated on the
ground as they were, unheeded almost. The clown – or the Mule – paced before them with little
steps, speaking downward to his own folded arms.
"The whole notion of my unusual power seems to have broken on me so slowly, in such
sluggish steps. Even toward the end, I couldn't believe it. To me, men's minds are dials, with
pointers that indicate the prevailing emotion. It is a poor picture, but how else can I explain it?
Slowly, I learned that I could reach into those minds and turn the pointer to the spot I wished,
that I could nail it there forever. And then it took even longer to realize that others couldn't.
"But the consciousness of power came, and with it, the desire to make up for the miserable
position of my earlier life. Maybe you can understand it. Maybe you can try to understand it. It
isn't easy to be a freak – to have a mind and an understanding and be a freak. Laughter and
cruelty! To be different! To be an outsider!
"You've never been through it!"
Magnifico looked up to the sky and teetered on the balls of his feet and reminisced stonily, "But
I eventually did learn, and I decided that the Galaxy and I could take turns. Come, they had had
their innings, and I had been patient about it – for twenty-two years. My turn! It would be up to
the rest of you to take it! And the odds would be fair enough for the Galaxy. One of me!
Quadrillions of them!"
He paused to glance at Bayta swiftly. "But I had a weakness. I was nothing in myself. If I could
gain power, it could only be by means of others. Success came to me through middlemen.
Always! It was as Pritcher said. Through a pirate, I obtained my first asteroidal base of
operations. Through an industrialist I got my first foothold on a planet. Through a variety of
others ending with the warlord of Kalgan, I won Kalgan itself and got a navy. After that, it was
the Foundation – and you two come into the story.
"The Foundation," he said, softly, "was the most difficult task I had met. To beat it, I would have
to win over, break down, or render useless an extraordinary proportion of its ruling class. I
could have done it from scratch – but a short cut was possible, and I looked for it. After all, if a
strong man can lift five hundred pounds, it does not mean that he is eager to do so
continuously. My emotional control is not an easy task, I prefer not to use it, where not fully
necessary. So I accepted allies in my first attack upon the Foundation.
"As my clown, I looked for the agent, or agents, of the Foundation that must inevitably have
been sent to Kalgan to investigate my humble self. I know now it was Han Pritcher I was
looking for. By a stroke of fortune, I found you instead. I am a telepath, but not a complete one,
and, my lady, you were from the Foundation. I was led astray by that. It was not fatal for
Pritcher joined us afterward, but it was the starting point of an error that was fatal."
Toran stirred for the first time. He spoke in an outraged tone, "Hold on, now. You mean that
when I outfaced that lieutenant on Kalgan with only a stun pistol, and rescued you – that you
had emotionally-controlled me into it." He was spluttering. "You mean I've been tampered with
all along."
A thin smile played on Magnifico's face. "Why not? You don't think it's likely? Ask yourself then
– Would you have risked death for a strange grotesque you had never seen before, if you had
been in your right mind? I imagine you were surprised at events in cold after-blood."
"Yes," said Bayta, distantly, "he was. It's quite plain."
"As it was," continued the Mule, "Toran was in no danger. The lieutenant had his own strict
instructions to let us go. So the three of us and Pritcher went to the Foundation – and see how
my campaign shaped itself instantly. When Pritcher was court-martialed and we were present, I
was busy. The military judges of that trial later commanded their squadrons in the war. They
surrendered rather easily, and my Navy won the battle of Horleggor, and other lesser affairs.
"Through Pritcher, I met Dr. Mis, who brought me a Visi-Sonor, entirely of his own accord, and
simplified my task immensely. Only it wasn't entirely of his own accord."
Bayta interrupted, "Those concerts! I've been trying to fit them in. Now I see."
"Yes," said Magnifico, "the Visi-Sonor acts as a focusing device. In a way, it is a primitive
device for emotional control in itself. With it, I can handle people in quantity and single people
more intensively. The concerts I gave on Terminus before it fell and Haven before it fell
contributed to the general defeatism. I might have made the crown prince of Neotrantor very
sick without the Visi-Sonor, but I could not have killed him. You see?
"But it was Ebling Mis who was my most important find. He might have been–" Magnifico said it
with chagrin, then hurried on, "There is a special facet to emotional control you do not know
about. Intuition or insight or hunch-tendency, whatever you wish to call it, can be treated as an
emotion. At least, I can treat it so. You don't understand it, do you?"
He waited for no negative, "The human mind works at low efficiency. Twenty percent is the
figure usually given. When, momentarily, there is a flash of greater power it is termed a hunch,
or insight, or intuition. I found early that I could induce a continual use of high brain-efficiency. It
is a killing process for the person affected, but it is useful. The nuclear field-depressor which I
used in the war against the Foundation was the result of high-pressuring a Kalgan technician.
Again I work through others.
"Ebling Mis was the bull's-eye. His potentialities were high, and I needed him. Even before my
war with the Foundation had opened, I had already sent delegates to negotiate with the Empire.
It was at that time I began my search for the Second Foundation. Naturally, I didn't find it.
Naturally, I knew that I must find it – and Ebling Mis was the answer. With his mind at high
efficiency, he might possibly have duplicated the work of Hari Seldon.
"Partly, he did. I drove him to the utter limit. The process was ruthless, but had to be completed.
He was dying at the end, but he lived–" Again, his chagrin interrupted him. "He would have
lived long enough. Together, we three could have gone onward to the Second Foundation. It
would have been the last battle – but for my mistake."
Toran stirred his voice to hardness, "Why do you stretch it out so? What was your mistake, and
... and have done with your speech."
"Why, your wife was the mistake. Your wife was an unusual person. I had never met her like
before in my life. I ... I–" Quite suddenly, Magnifico's voice broke. He recovered with difficulty.
There was a grimness about him as he continued. "She liked me without my having to juggle
her emotions. She was neither repelled by me nor amused by me. She liked me!
"Don't you understand? Can't you see what that would mean to me? Never before had anyone
– Well, I ... cherished that. My own emotions played me false, though I was master of all others.
I stayed out of her mind, you see; I did not tamper with it. I cherished the natural feeling too
greatly. It was my mistake – the first.
"You, Toran, were under control. You never suspected me; never questioned me; never saw
anything peculiar or strange about me. As for instance, when the 'Filian' ship stopped us. They
knew our location, by the way, because I was in communication with them, as I've remained in
communication with my generals at all times. When they stopped us, I was taken aboard to
adjust Han Pritcher, who was on it as a prisoner. When I left, he was a colonel, a Mule's man,
and in command. The whole procedure was too open even for you, Toran. Yet you accepted
my explanation of the matter, which was full of fallacies. See what I mean?"
Toran grimaced, and challenged him, "How did you retain communications with your generals?"
"There was no difficulty to it. Hyperwave transmitters are easy to handle and eminently
portable. Nor could I be detected in a real sense! Anyone who did catch me in the act would
leave me with a slice gapped out of his memory. It happened, on occasion.
"On Neotrantor, my own foolish emotions betrayed me again. Bayta was not under my control,
but even so might never have suspected me if I had kept my head about the crown prince. His
intentions towards Bayta – annoyed me.
"I killed him. It was a foolish gesture. An unobtrusive flight would have served as well.
"And still your suspicions would not have been certainties, if I had stopped Pritcher in his
well-intentioned babbling, or paid less attention to Mis and more to you–" He shrugged.
"That's the end of it?" asked Bayta.
"That's the end."
"What now, then?"
"I'll continue with my program. That I'll find another as adequately brained and trained as Ebling
Mis in these degenerate days, I doubt. I shall have to search for the Second Foundation
otherwise. In a sense you have defeated me."
And now Bayta was upon her feet, triumphant. "In a sense? Only in a sense? We have
defeated you entirely! All your victories outside the Foundation count for nothing, since the
Galaxy is a barbarian vacuum now. The Foundation itself is only a minor victory, since it wasn't
meant to stop your variety of crisis. It's the Second Foundation you must beat – the Second
Foundation – and it's the Second Foundation that will defeat you. Your only chance was to
locate it and strike it before it was prepared. You won't do that now. Every minute from now on,
they will be readier for you. At this moment, at this moment, the machinery may have started.
You'll know – when it strikes you, and your short term of power will be over, and you'll be just
another strutting conqueror, flashing quickly and meanly across the bloody face of history."
She was breathing hard, nearly gasping in her vehemence, "And we've defeated you, Toran
and I. I am satisfied to die."
But the Mule's sad, brown eyes were the sad, brown, loving eyes of Magnifico. "I won't kill you
or your husband. It is, after all, impossible for you two to hurt me further; and killing you won't
bring back Ebling Mis. My mistakes were my own, and I take responsibility for them. Your
husband and yourself may leave! Go in peace, for the sake of what I call – friendship."
Then, with a sudden touch of pride, "And meanwhile I am still the Mule, the most powerful man
in the Galaxy. I shall still defeat the Second Foundation."
And Bayta shot her last arrow with a firm, calm certitude, "You won't! I have faith in the wisdom
of Seldon yet. You shall be the last ruler of your dynasty, as well as the first."
Something caught Magnifico. "Of my dynasty? Yes, I had thought of that, often. That I might
establish a dynasty. That I might have a suitable consort."
Bayta suddenly caught the meaning of the look in his eyes and froze horribly.
Magnifico shook his head. "I sense your revulsion, but that's silly. If things were otherwise, I
could make you happy very easily. It would be an artificial ecstasy, but there would be no
difference between it and the genuine emotion. But things are not otherwise. I call myself the
Mule – but not because of my strength – obviously–"
He left them, never looking back.

SECOND FOUNDATION
ISAAC ASIMOV
Contents
PROLOGUE
PART I SEARCH BY THE MULE
1. TWO MEN AND THE MULE
First Interlude
2. TWO MEN WITHOUT THE MULE
Second Interlude
3. TWO MEN AND A PEASANT
Third Interlude
4. TWO MEN AND THE ELDERS
Fourth Interlude
5. ONE MAN AND THE MULE
6. ONE MAN, THE MULE – AND ANOTHER
Last Interlude
PART II SEARCH BY THE FOUNDATION
7. ARCADIA
8. SELDON'S PLAN
9. THE CONSPIRATORS
10. APPROACHING CRISIS
11. STOWAWAY
12. LORD
13. LADY
14. ANXIETY
15. THROUGH THE GRID
16. BEGINNING OF WAR
17. WAR
18. GHOST OF A WORLD
19. END OF WAR
20. "I KNOW ..."
21. THE ANSWER THAT SATISFIED
22. THE ANSWER THAT WAS TRUE
Prologue
The First Galactic Empire had endured for tens of thousands of years. It had included all the
planets of the Galaxy in a centralized rule, sometimes tyrannical, sometimes benevolent,
always orderly. Human beings had forgotten that any other form of existence could be.
All except Hari Seldon.
Hari Seldon was the last great scientist of the First Empire. It was he who brought the science
of psycho-history to its full development. Psycho-history was the quintessence of sociology, it
was the science of human behavior reduced to mathematical equations.
The individual human being is unpredictable, but the reactions of human mobs, Seldon found,
could be treated statistically. The larger the mob, the greater the accuracy that could be
achieved. And the size of the human masses that Seldon worked with was no less than the
population of the Galaxy which in his time was numbered in the quintillions.
It was Seldon, then, who foresaw, against all common sense and popular belief, that the
brilliant Empire which seemed so strong was in a state of irremediable decay and decline. He
foresaw (or he solved his equations and interpreted its symbols, which amounts to the same
thing) that left to itself, the Galaxy would pass through a thirty thousand year period of misery
and anarchy before a unified government would rise once more.
He set about to remedy the situation, to bring about a state of affairs that would restore peace
and civilization in a single thousand of years. Carefully, he set up two colonies of scientists that
he called "Foundations." With deliberate intention, he set them up "at opposite ends of the
Galaxy." One Foundation was set up in the full daylight of publicity. The existence of the other,
the Second Foundation, was drowned in silence.
In Foundation (Gnome, 1951) and Foundation and Empire (Gnome, 1952) are told the first
three centuries of the history of the First Foundation. It began as a small community of
Encyclopedists lost in the emptiness of the outer periphery of the Galaxy. Periodically, it faced
a crisis in which the variables of human intercourse, of the social and economic currents of the
time constricted about it. Its freedom to move lay along only one certain line and when it moved
in that direction, a new horizon of development opened before it. All had been planned by Hari
Seldon, long dead now.
The First Foundation, with its superior science, took over the barbarized planets that
surrounded it. It faced the anarchic Warlords that broke away from the dying Empire and beat
them. It faced the remnant of the Empire itself under its last strong Emperor and its last strong
General and beat it.
Then it faced something which Hari Seldon could not foresee, the overwhelming power of a
single human being, a Mutant. The creature known as the Mule was born with the ability to
mold men's emotions and to shape their minds. His bitterest opponents were made into his
devoted servants. Armies could not, would not fight him. Before him, the First Foundation fell
and Seldon's schemes lay partly in ruins.
There was left the mysterious Second Foundation, the goal of all searches. The Mule must find
it to make his conquest of the Galaxy complete. The faithful of what was left of the First
Foundation must find it for quite another reason. But where was it? That no one knew.
This, then, is the story of the search for the Second Foundation!
PART I
SEARCH BY THE MULE
1
Two Men and the Mule
THE MULE It was after the fall of the First Foundation that the constructive aspects of the
Mule's regime took shape. After the definite break-up at the first Galactic Empire, it was he who
first presented history with a unified volume at space truly imperial in scope. The earlier
commercial empire at the fallen Foundation had been diverse and loosely knit, despite the
impalpable backing at the predictions of psycho-history. It was not to be compared with the
tightly controlled 'Union of Worlds' under the Mule, comprising as it did, one-tenth the volume of
the Galaxy and one-fifteenth of its population. Particularly during the era of the so-called
Search....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA *
* All quotations from the Encyclopedia Galactica here reproduced are taken from the 116th
Edition published in 1020 F.E. by the Encyclopedia Galactica Publishing Co., Terminus, with
permission of the publishers.
There is much more that the Encyclopedia has to say on the subject of the Mule and his Empire
but almost all of it is not germane to the issue at immediate hand, and most of it is considerably
too dry for our purposes in any case. Mainly, the article concerns itself at this point with the
economic conditions that led to the rise of the "First Citizen of the Union" – the Mule's official
title – and with the economic consequences thereof.
If, at any time, the writer of the article is mildly astonished at the colossal haste with which the
Mule rose from nothing to vast dominion in five years, he conceals it. If he is further surprised at
the sudden cessation of expansion in favor of a five-year consolidation of territory, he hides the
fact.
We therefore abandon the Encyclopedia and continue on our own path for our own purposes
and take up the history of the Great Interregnum – between the First and Second Galactic
Empires – at the end of that five years of consolidation.
Politically, the Union is quiet. Economically, it is prosperous. Few would care to exchange the
peace of the Mule's steady grip for the chaos that had preceded, On the worlds that five years
previously had known the Foundation, there might be a nostalgic regret, but no more. The
Foundation's leaders were dead, where useless; and Converted, where useful.
And of the Converted, the most useful was Han Pritcher, now lieutenant general.
In the days of the Foundation, Han Pritcher had been a captain and a member of the
underground Democratic Opposition. When the Foundation fell to the Mule without a fight,
Pritcher fought the Mule. Until, that is, he was Converted.
The Conversion was not the ordinary one brought on by the power of superior reason. Han
Pritcher know that well enough. He had been changed because the Mule was a mutant with
mental powers quite capable of adjusting the conditions of ordinary humans to suit himself. But
that satisfied him completely. That was as it should be. The very contentment with the
Conversion was a prime symptom of it, but Han Pritcher was no longer even curious about the
matter.
And now that he was returning from his fifth major expedition into the boundlessness of the
Galaxy outside the Union, it was with something approaching artless joy that the veteran
spaceman and Intelligence agent considered his approaching audience with the "First Citizen."
His hard face, gouged out of a dark, grainless wood that did not seem to be capable of smiling
without cracking, didn't show it – but the outward indications were unnecessary. The Mule could
see the emotions within, down to the smallest, much as an ordinary man could see the twitch of
an eyebrow.
Pritcher left his air car at the old vice-regal hangars and entered the palace grounds on foot as
was required. He walked one mile along the arrowed highway – which was empty and silent.
Pritcher knew that over the square miles of Palace grounds, there was not one guard, not one
soldier, not one armed man.
The Mule had need of no protection.
The Mule was his own best, all-powerful protector.
Pritcher's footsteps beat softly in his own cars, as the palace reared its gleaming, incredibly
light and incredibly strong metallic walls before him in the daring, overblown, near-hectic arches
that characterized the architecture of the Late Empire. It brooded strongly over the empty
grounds, over the crowded city on the horizon.
Within the palace was that one man – by himself – on whose inhuman mental attributes
depended the new aristocracy, and the whole structure of the Union.
The huge, smooth door swung massively open at the general's approach, and he entered. He
stepped on to the wide, sweeping ramp that moved upward under him. He rose swiftly in the
noiseless elevator. He stood before the small plain door of the Mule's own room in the highest
glitter of the palace spires.
It opened–
Bail Channis was young, and Bail Channis was Unconverted. That is, in plainer language, his
emotional make-up had been unadjusted by the Mule. It remained exactly as it had been
formed by the original shape of its heredity and the subsequent modifications of his
environment. And that satisfied him, too.
At not quite thirty, he was in marvelously good odor in the capital. He was handsome and
quick-witted – therefore successful in society. He was intelligent and self-possessed – therefore
successful with the Mule. And he was thoroughly pleased at both successes.
And now, for the first time, the Mule had summoned him to personal audience.
His legs carried him down the long, glittering highway that led tautly to the sponge-aluminum
spires that had been once the residence of the viceroy of Kalgan, who ruled under the old
emperors; and that had been later the residence of the independent Princes of Kalgan, who
ruled in their own name; and that was now the residence of the First Citizen of the Union, who
ruled over an empire of his own.
Channis hummed softly to himself. He did not doubt what this was all about. The Second
Foundation, naturally! That all-embracing bogey, the mere consideration of which had thrown
the Mule back from his policy of limitless expansion into static caution. The official term was –
"consolidation."
Now there were rumors – you couldn't stop rumors. The Mule was to begin the offensive once
more. The Mule had discovered the whereabouts of the Second Foundation, and would attack
The Mule had come to an agreement with the Second Foundation and divided the Galaxy. The
Mule had decided the Second Foundation did not exist and would take over all the Galaxy.
No use listing all the varieties one heard in the anterooms. It was not even the first time such
rumors had circulated. But now they seemed to have more body in them, and all the free,
expansive Souls Who thrived on war, military adventure, and political chaos and withered in
times of stability and stagnant peace were joyful.
Bail Channis was one of these. He did not fear the mysterious Second Foundation. For that
matter, he did not fear the Mule, and boasted of it. Some, perhaps, who disapproved of one at
once so young and so well-off, waited darkly for the reckoning with the gay ladies' man who
employed his wit openly at the expense of the Mule's physical appearance and sequestered
life. None dared join him and few dared laugh, but when nothing happened to him, his
reputation rose accordingly.
Channis was improvising words to the tune he was humming. Nonsense words with the
recurrent refrain: "Second Foundation threatens the Nation and all of Creation."
He was at the palace.
The huge, smooth door swung massively open at his approach and he entered. He stepped on
to the wide, sweeping ramp that moved upward under him. He rose swiftly in the noiseless
elevator. He stood before the small plain door of the Mule's own room in the highest glitter of
the palace spires.
It opened–
The man who had no name other than the Mule, and no title other than First Citizen looked out
through the one-way transparency of the wall to the light and lofty city on the horizon.
In the darkening twilight, the stars were emerging, and not one but owed allegiance to him.
He smiled with fleeting bitterness at the thought. The allegiance they owed was to a personality
few had ever seen.
He was not a man to look at, the Mule – not a man to look at without derision. Not more than
one hundred and twenty pounds was stretched out into his five-foot-eight length. His limbs were
bony stalks that jutted out of his scrawniness in graceless angularity. And his thin face was
nearly drowned out in the prominence of a fleshy beak that thrust three inches outward.
Only his eyes played false with the general farce that was the Mule. In their softness – a
strange softness for the Galaxy's greatest conqueror – sadness was never entirely subdued.
In the city was to be found all the gaiety of a luxurious capital on a luxurious world. He might
have established his capital on the Foundation, the strongest of his now-conquered enemies,
but it was far out on the very rim of the Galaxy. Kalgan, more centrally located, with a long
tradition as aristocracy's playground, suited him better – strategically.
But in its traditional gaiety, enhanced by unheard-of prosperity, he found no peace.
They feared him and obeyed him and, perhaps, even respected him – from a goodly distance.
But who could look at him without contempt? Only those he had Converted. And of what value
was their artificial loyalty? It lacked flavor. He might have adopted titles, and enforced ritual and
invented elaborations, but even that would have changed nothing. Better – or at least, no worse
– to be simply the First Citizen – and to hide himself.
There was a sudden surge of rebellion within him – strong and brutal. Not a portion of the
Galaxy must be denied him, For five years he had remained silent and buried here on Kalgan
because of the eternal, misty, space-ridden menace of the unseen, unheard, unknown Second
Foundation. He was thirty-two. Not old – but he felt old. His body, whatever its mutant mental
powers, was physically weak.
Every star! Every star he could see – and every star he couldnt see. It must all be his!
Revenge on all. On a humanity of which he wasn't a part. On a Galaxy in which he didn't fit.
The cool, overhead warning light flickered. He could follow the progress of the man who had
entered the palace, and simultaneously, as though his mutant sense had been enhanced and
sensitized in the lonely twilight, he felt the wash of emotional content touch the fibers of his
brain.
He recognized the identity without an effort. It was Pritcher.
Captain Pritcher of the one-time Foundation. The Captain Pritcher who had been ignored and
passed over by the bureaucrats of that decaying government. The Captain Pritcher whose job
as petty spy he had wiped out and whom he had lifted from its slime. The Captain Pritcher
whom he had made first colonel and then general; whose scope of activity he had made
Galaxywide.
The now-General Pritcher who was, iron rebel though he began, completely loyal. And yet with
all that, not loyal because of benefits gained, not loyal out of gratitude, not loyal as a fair return
– but loyal only through the artifice of Conversion.
The Mule was conscious of that strong unalterable surface layer of loyalty and love that colored
every swirl and eddy of the emotionality of Han Pritcher – the layer he had himself implanted
five years before. Far underneath there were the original traces of stubborn individuality,
impatience of rule, idealism – but even he, himself, could scarcely detect them any longer.
The door behind him opened, and he turned. The transparency of the wall faded to opacity, and
the purple evening light gave way to the whitely blazing glow of atomic power.
Han Pritcher took the seat indicated. There was neither bowing, nor kneeling nor the use of
honorifics in private audiences with the Mule. The Mule was merely "First Citizen." He was
addressed as "sir." You sat in his presence, and you could turn your back on him if it so
happened that you did.
To Han Pritcher this was all evidence of the sure and confident power of the man. He was
warmly satisfied with it.
The Mule said: "Your final report reached me yesterday. I can't deny that I find it somewhat
depressing, Pritcher."
The general's eyebrows closed upon each other: "Yes, I imagine so – but I don't see to what
other conclusions I could have come. There just isn't any Second Foundation, sir."
Arid the Mule considered and then slowly shook his head, as he had done many a time before:
"There's the evidence of Ebling Mis. There is always the evidence of Ebling Mis."
It was not a new story. Pritcher said without qualification: "Mis may have been the greatest
psychologist of the Foundation, but he was a baby compared to Hari Seldon. At the time he
was investigating Seldon's works, he was under the artificial stimulation of your own brain
control. You may have pushed him too far. He might have been wrong. Sir, he must have been
wrong."
The Mule sighed, his lugubrious face thrust forward on its thin stalk of a neck. "If only he had
lived another minute. He was on the point of telling me where the Second Foundation was. He
knew, I'm telling you. I need not have retreated. I need not have waited and waited. So much
time lost. Five years gone for nothing."
Pritcher could not have been censorious over the weak longing of his ruler; his controlled
mental make-up forbade that. He was disturbed instead; vaguely uneasy. He said: "But what
alternative explanation can there possibly be, sir? Five times I've gone out. You yourself have
plotted the routes. And I've left no asteroid unturned. It was three hundred years ago that Hari
Seldon of the old Empire supposedly established two Foundations to act as nuclei of a new
Empire to replace the dying old one. One hundred years after Seldon, the First Foundation –
the one we know so well – was known through all the Periphery. One hundred fifty years after
Seldon – at the time of the last battle with the old Empire – it was known throughout the Galaxy.
And now it's three hundred years – and where should this mysterious Second be? In no eddy of
the Galactic stream has it been heard of."
"Ebling Mis said it kept itself secret. Only secrecy can turn its weakness to strength."
"Secrecy as deep as this is past possibility without nonexistence as well."
The Mule looked up, large eyes sharp and wary. "No. It does exist." A bony finger pointed
sharply. "There is going to be a slight change in tactics."
Pritcher frowned. "You plan to leave yourself? I would scarcely advise it."
"No, of course not. You will have to go out once again – one last time. But with another in joint
command."
There was a silence, and Pritcher's voice was hard, "Who, Sir?"
"There's a young man here in Kalgan. Bail Channis."
"I've never heard of him, Sir."
"No, I imagine not. But he's got an agile mind, he's ambitious – and he's not Converted."
Pritcher's long jaw trembled for a bare instant, "I fail to see the advantage in that."
"There is one, Pritcher. You're a resourceful and experienced man. You have given me good
service. But you are Converted. Your motivation is simply an enforced and helpless loyalty to
myself. When you lost your native motivations, you lost something, some subtle drive, that I
cannot possibly replace."
"I don't feel that, Sir," said Pritcher grimly. "I recall myself quite well as I was in the days when I
was an enemy of yours. I feel none the inferior."
"Naturally not," and the Mule’s mouth twitched into a smile. "Your judgment in this matter is
scarcely objective. This Channis, now, is ambitious – for himself. He is completely trustworthy –
out of no loyalty but to himself. He knows that it is on my coattails that he rides and he would do
anything to increase my power that the ride might be long and far and that the destination might
be glorious. If he goes with you, there is just that added push behind his seeking – that push for
himself.'
"Then," said Pritcher. still insistent, "why not remove my own Conversion, if you think that will
improve me. I can scarcely be mistrusted, now."
"That never, Pritcher. While you are within arm's reach, or blaster reach, of myself, you will
remain firmly held in Conversion. If I were to release you this minute, I would be dead the next."
The general's nostrils flared. "I am hurt that you should think so."
"I don't mean to hurt you, but it is impossible for you to realize what your feelings would be if
free to form themselves along the lines of your natural motivation. The human mind resents
control. The ordinary human hypnotist cannot hypnotize a person against his will for that
reason. I can, because I'm not a hypnotist, and, believe me, Pritcher, the resentment that you
cannot show and do not even know you possess is something I wouldn't want to face."
Pritcher's head bowed. Futility wrenched him and left him gray and haggard inside. He said with
an effort, "But how can you trust this man. I mean, completely – as you can trust me in my
Conversion."
"Well, I suppose I can't entirely. That is why you must go with him. You see, Pritcher," and the
Mule buried himself in the large armchair against the soft back of which he looked like an
angularly animated toothpick, "if he should stumble on the Second Foundation – if it should
occur to him that an arrangement with them might be more profitable than with me – You
understand?"
A profoundly satisfied light blazed in Pritcher's eyes. "That is better, Sir."
"Exactly. But remember, he must have a free rein as far as possible."
"Certainly."
"And ... uh ... Pritcher. The young man is handsome, pleasant and extremely charming. Don't
let him fool you. He's a dangerous and unscrupulous character. Don't get in his way unless
you're prepared to meet him properly. That's all."
The Mule was alone again. He let the lights die and the wall before him kicked to transparency
again. The sky was purple now, and the city was a smudge of light on the horizon.
What was it all for? And if he were the master of all there was – what then? Would it really stop
men like Pritcher. from being straight and tall, self-confident, strong? Would Bail Channis lose
his looks? Would he himself be other than he was?
He cursed his doubts. What was he really after?
The cool, overhead warning light flickered. He could follow the progress of the man who had
entered the palace and, almost against his will, he felt the soft wash of emotional content touch
the fibers of his brain.
He recognized the identity without an effort. It was Channis. Here the Mule saw no uniformity,
but the primitive diversity of a strong mind, untouched and unmolded except by the manifold
disorganizations of the Universe. It writhed in floods and waves. There was caution on the
surface, a thin, smoothing effect, but with touches of cynical ribaldry in the hidden eddies of it.
And underneath there was the strong flow of self-interest and self-love, with a gush of cruel
humor here and there, and a deep, still pool of ambition underlying all.
The Mule felt that he could reach out and dam the current, wrench the pool from its basin and
turn it in another course, dry up one flow and begin another. But what of it? If he could bend
Channis’ curly head in the profoundest adoration, would that change his own grotesquerie that
made him shun the day and love the night, that made him a recluse inside an empire that was
unconditionally big?
The door behind him opened, and he turned. The transparency of the wall faded to opacity, and
the darkness gave way to the whitely blazing artifice of atomic power.
Bail Channis sat down lightly and said: "This is a not-quite-unexpected honor, sir."
The Mule rubbed his proboscis with all four fingers at once and sounded a bit irritable in his
response. "Why so, young man?"
"A hunch, I suppose. Unless I want to admit that I've been listening to rumors."
"Rumors? Which one of the several dozen varieties are you referring to?"
"Those that say a renewal of the Galactic Offensive is being planned. It is a hope with me that
such is true and that I might play an appropriate part."
"Then you think there is a Second Foundation?"
"Why not? It would make things so much more interesting."
"And you find interest in it as well?"
"Certainly. In the very mystery of it! What better subject could you find for conjecture? The
newspaper supplements are full of nothing else lately – which is probably significant. The
Cosmos had one of its feature writers compose a weirdie about a world consisting of beings of
pure mind – the Second Foundation, you see – who had developed mental force to energies
large enough to compete with any known to physical science. Spaceships could be blasted
light-years away, planets could be turned out of their orbits--"
"Interesting. Yes. But do you have any notions on the subject? Do you subscribe to this
mind-power notion?'
"Galaxy, no! Do you think creatures like that would stay on their own planet? No, sir. I think the
Second Foundation remains hidden because it is weaker than we think."
"In that case, I can explain myself very easily. How would you like to head an expedition to
locate the Second Foundation?"
For a moment Channis seemed caught up by the sudden rush of events at just a little greater
speed than he was prepared for. His tongue had apparently skidded to a halt in a lengthening
silence.
The Mule said dryly: "Well?"
Channis corrugated his forehead. "Certainly. But where am I to go? Have you any information
available?"
"General Pritcher will be with you–"
"Then I'm not to head it?"
"Judge for yourself when I'm done. Listen, you're not of the Foundation. You're a native of
Kalgan, aren't you? Yes. Well, then, your knowledge of the Seldon plan may be vague. When
the first Galactic Empire was falling, Hari Seldon and a group of psychohistorians, analyzing the
future course of history by mathematical tools no longer available in these degenerate times,
set up two Foundations, one at each end of the Galaxy, in such a way that the economic and
sociological forces that were slowly evolving, would make them serve as foci for the Second
Empire. Hari Seldon planned on a thousand years to accomplish that – and it would have taken
thirty thousand without the Foundations. But he couldn't count on me. I am a mutant and I am
unpredictable by psychohistory which can only deal with the average reactions of numbers. Do
you understand?"
"Perfectly, sir. But how does that involve me?'
"You'll understand shortly. I intend to unite the Galaxy now – and reach Seldon's thousand-year
goal in three hundred. One Foundation – the world of physical scientists – is still flourishing,
under me. Under the prosperity and order of the Union, the atomic weapons they have
developed are capable of dealing with anything in the Galaxy – except perhaps the Second
Foundation. So I must know more about it. General Pritcher is of the definite opinion that it
does not exist at all. I know otherwise."
Channis said delicately: "How do you know, sir?"
And the Mule's words were suddenly liquid indignation: "Because minds under my control have
been interfered with. Delicately! Subtly! But not so subtly that I couldn't notice. And these
interferences are increasing, and hitting valuable men at important times. Do you wonder now
that a certain discretion has kept me motionless these years?
"That is your importance. General Pritcher is the best man left me, so he is no longer safe. Of
course, he does not know that. But you are Unconverted and therefore not instantly detectable
as a Mule's man. You may fool the Second Foundation longer than one of my own men would –
perhaps just sufficiently longer. Do you understand?"
"Um-m-m. Yes. But pardon me, sir, if I question you. How are these men of yours disturbed, so
that I might detect change in General Pritcher, in case any occurs. Are they Unconverted
again? Do they become disloyal?"
"No. I told you it was subtle. It's more disturbing than that, because its harder to detect and
sometimes I have to wait before acting, uncertain whether a key man is being normally erratic
or has been tampered with. Their loyalty is left intact, but initiative and ingenuity are rubbed out.
I'm left with a perfectly normal person, apparently, but one completely useless. In the last year,
six have been so treated. Six of my best." A corner of his mouth lifted. "They're in charge of
training bases now – and my most earnest wishes go with them that no emergencies come up
for them to decide upon."
"Suppose, sir ... suppose it were not the Second Foundation. What if it were another, such as
yourself – another mutant?"
"The planning is too careful, too long range. A single man would be in a greater hurry. No, it is a
world, and you are to be my weapon against it."
Channis' eyes shone as he said: "I'm delighted at the chance."
But the Mule caught the sudden emotional upwelling. He said: "Yes, apparently it occurs to you,
that you will perform a unique service, worthy of a unique reward – perhaps even that of being
my successor. Quite so. But there are unique punishments, too, you know. My emotional
gymnastics are not confined to the creation of loyalty alone."
And the little smile on his thin lips was grim, as Channis leaped out of his seat in horror.
For just an instant, just one, flashing instant, Channis had felt the pang of an overwhelming
grief close over him. It had slammed down with a physical pain that had blackened his mind
unbearably, and then lifted. Now nothing was left but the strong wash of anger.
The Mule said: "Anger won't help ... yes, you're covering it up now, aren't you? But I can see it.
So just remember – that sort of business can be made more intense and kept up. I've killed
men by emotional control, and there's no death crueler."
He paused: "That's all!"
The Mule was alone again. He let the lights die and the wall before him kicked to transparency
again. The sky was black, and the rising body of the Galactic Lens was spreading its
bespanglement across the velvet depths of space.
All that haze of nebula was a mass of stars so numerous that they melted one into the other
and left nothing but a cloud of light.
And all to be his–
And now but one last arrangement to make, and he could sleep.
FIRST INTERLUDE
The Executive Council of the Second Foundation was in session. To us they are merely voices.
Neither the exact scene of the meeting nor the identity of those present are essential at the
point.
Nor, strictly speaking, can we even consider an exact reproduction of any part of the session –
unless we wish to sacrifice completely even the minimum comprehensibility we have a right to
expect.
We deal here with psychologists – and not merely psychologists. Let us say, rather, scientists
with a psychological orientation. That is, men whose fundamental conception of scientific
philosophy is pointed in an entirely different direction from all of the orientations we know. The
"psychology" of scientists brought up among the axioms deduced from the observational habits
of physical science has only the vaguest relationship to PSYCHOLOGY.
Which is about as far as I can go in explaining color to a blind man – with myself as blind as the
audience.
The point being made is that the minds assembled understood thoroughly the workings of each
other, not only by general theory but by the specific application over a long period of these
theories to particular individuals. Speech as known to us was unnecessary. A fragment of a
sentence amounted almost to long-winded redundancy. A gesture, a grunt, the curve of a facial
line – even a significantly timed pause yielded informational juice.
The liberty is taken, therefore, of freely translating a small portion of the conference into the
extremely specific word-combinations necessary to minds oriented from childhood to a physical
science philosophy, even at the risk of losing the more delicate nuances.
There was one "voice" predominant, and that belonged to the individual known simply as the
First Speaker.
He said: "It is apparently quite definite now as to what stopped the Mule in his first mad rush. I
can't say that the matter reflects credit upon ... well, upon the organization of the situation.
Apparently, he almost located us, by means of the artificially heightened brain-energy of what
they call a 'psychologist' on the First Foundation. This psychologist was killed just before he
could communicate his discovery to the Mule. The events leading to that killing were completely
fortuitous for all calculations below Phase Three. Suppose you take over."
It was the Fifth Speaker who was indicated by an inflection of the voice. He said, in grim
nuances: "It is certain that the situation was mishandled. We are, of course, highly vulnerable
under mass attack, particularly an attack led by such a mental phenomenon as the Mule.
Shortly after he first achieved Galactic eminence with the conquest of the First Foundation, half
a year after to be exact, he was on Trantor. Within another half year he would have been here
and the odds would have been stupendously against us – 96.3 plus or minus 0.05% to be
exact. We have spent considerable time analyzing the forces that stopped him. We know, of
course, what was driving him on so in the first place. The internal ramifications of his physical
deformity and mental uniqueness are obvious to all of us. However, it was only through
penetration to Phase Three that we could determine – after the fact – tbe possibility of his
anomalous action in the presence of another human being who had an honest affection for him.
"And since such an anomalous action would depend upon the presence of such another human
being at the appropriate time, to that extent the whole affair was fortuitous. Our agents are
certain that it was a girl that killed the Mule's psychologist – a girl for whom the Mule felt trust
out of sentiment, and whom he, therefore, did not control mentally – simply because she liked
him.
"Since that event – and for those who want the details, a mathematical treatment of the subject
has been drawn up for the Central Library – which warned us, we have held the Mule off by
unorthodox methods with which we daily risk SeIdon's entire scheme of history. That is all."
The First Speaker paused an instant to allow the individuals assembled to absorb the full
implications. He said: "The situation is then highly unstable. With Seldon's original scheme bent
to the fracture point – and I must emphasize that we have blundered badly in this whole matter,
in our horrible lack of foresight – we are faced with an irreversible breakdown of the Plan. Time
is passing us by. I think there is only one solution left us – and even that is risky.
"We must allow the Mule to find us – in a sense."
Another pause, in which he gathered the reactions, then: "I repeat – in a sense!"
2
Two Men without the Mule
The ship was in near-readiness. Nothing lacked, but the destination. The Mule had suggested a
return to Trantor – the world that was the bulk of an incomparable Galactic metropolis of the
hugest Empire mankind had ever known – the dead world that had been capital of all the stars.
Pritcher disapproved. It was an old path – sucked dry.
He found Bail Channis in the ship's navigation room. The young man's curly hair was just
sufficiently disheveled to allow a single curl to droop over the forehead – as if it had been
carefully placed there – and even teeth showed in a smile that matched it. Vaguely, the stiff
officer felt himself harden against the other.
Channis' excitement was evident, "Pritcher, it's too far a coincidence."
The general said coldly: "I’m not aware of the subject of conversation."
"Oh– Well, then drag up a chair, old man, and let’s get into it. I've been going over your notes. I
find them excellent."
"How ... pleasant that you do."
"But I’m wondering if you've come to the conclusions I have. Have you ever tried analyzing the
problem deductively? I mean, it's all very well to comb the stars at random, and to have done all
you did in five expeditions is quite a bit of star-hopping. That's obvious. But have you calculated
how long it would take to go through every known world at this rate?"
"Yes. Several times," Pritcher felt no urge to meet the young man halfway, but there was the
importance of filching the other's mind – the other's uncontrolled, and hence, unpredictable,
mind.
"Well, then, suppose we're analytical about it and try to decide just what we're looking for?"
"The Second Foundation," said Pritcher, grimly.
"A Foundation of psychologists," corrected Channis, "who are is weak in physical science as
the First Foundation was weak in psychology. Well, you're from the First Foundation, which I'm
not. The implications are probably obvious to you. We must find a world which rules by virtue of
mental skills, and yet which is very backwards scientifically."
"Is that necessarily so?" questioned Pritcher, quietly. "Our own ‘Union of Worlds' isn't
backwards scientifically, even though our ruler owes his strength to his mental powers."
"Because he has the skills of the First Foundation to draw upon," came the slightly impatient
answer, "and that is the only such reservoir of knowledge in the Galaxy. The Second
Foundation must live among the dry crumbs of the broken Galactic Empire. There are no
pickings there."
"So then you postulate mental power sufficient to establish their rule over a group of worlds and
physical helplessness as well?"
"Comparative physical helplessness. Against the decadent neighboring areas, they are
competent to defend themselves. Against the resurgent forces of the Mule, with his background
of a mature atomic economy, they cannot stand. Else, why is their location so well-hidden, both
at the start by the founder, Hari Seldon, and now by themselves. Your own First Foundation
made no secret of its existence and did not have it made for them, when they were an
undefended single city on a lonely planet three hundred years ago."
The smooth lines of Pritcher's dark face twitched sardonically. 'And now that you've finished
your deep analysis, would you like a list of all the kingdoms, republics, planet states and
dictatorships of one sort or another in that political wilderness out there that correspond to your
description and to several factors besides?"
"All this has been considered then?" Channis lost none of his brashness.
"You won't find it here, naturally, but we have a completely worked out guide to the political
units of the Opposing Periphery. Really, did you suppose the Mule would work entirely
hit-and-miss?"
"Well, then" and the young man's voice rose in a burst of energy, "what of the Oligarchy of
Tazenda?"
Pritcher touched his ear thoughtfully, "Tazenda? Oh, I think I know it. They're not in the
Periphery, are they? It seems to me they're fully a third of the way towards the center of the
Galaxy."
"Yes. What of that?"
"The records we have place the Second Foundation at the other end of the Galaxy. Space
knows it's the only thing we have to go on. Why talk of Tazenda anyway? Its angular deviation
from the First Foundation radian is only about one hundred ten to one hundred twenty degrees
anyway. Nowhere near one hundred eighty."
"There's another point in the records. The Second Foundation was established at 'Star's End.'"
"No such region in the Galaxy has ever been located."
"Because it was a local name, suppressed later for greater secrecy. Or maybe one invented for
the purpose by Seldon and his group. Yet there's some relationship between 'Star's End' and
'Tazenda,’ don't you think?"
"A vague similarity in sound? Insufficient."
'Have you ever been there?"
"No."
"Yet it is mentioned in your records."
"Where? Oh, yes, but that was merely to take on food and water. There was certainly nothing
remarkable about the world."
"Did you land at the ruling planet? The center of government?"
"I couldn't possibly say."
Channis brooded about it under the other's cold gaze. Then, "Would you look at the Lens with
me for a moment?"
"Certainly."
The Lens was perhaps the newest feature of the interstellar cruisers of the day. Actually, it was
a complicated calculating machine which could throw on a screen a reproduction of the night
sky as seen from any given point of the Galaxy.
Channis adjusted the co-ordinate points and the wall lights of the pilot room were extinguished.
In the dim red light at the control board of the Lens, Channis' face glowed ruddily. Pritcher sat in
the pilot seat, long legs crossed, face lost in the gloom.
Slowly, as the induction period passed, the points of light brightened on the screen. And then
they were thick and bright with the generously populated star-groupings of the Galaxy's center.
"This," explained Channis, "is the winter night-sky as seen from Trantor. That is the important
point that, as far as I know, has been neglected so far in your search. All intelligent orientation
must start from Trantor as zero point. Trantor was the capital of the Galactic Empire. Even
more so scientifically and culturally, than politically. And, therefore, the significance of any
descriptive name should stem, nine times out of ten, from a Trantorian orientation. You'll
remember in this connection that, although Seldon was from Helicon, towards the Periphery,
his group worked on Trantor itself."
"What is it you're trying to show me?" Pritcher's level voice plunged icily into the gathering
enthusiasm of the other.
"The map will explain it. Do you see the dark nebula?" The shadow of his arm fell upon the
screen, which took on the bespanglement of the Galaxy. The pointing finger ended on a tiny
patch of black that seemed a hole in the speckled fabric of light. "The stellagraphical records
call it Pelot's Nebula. Watch it. I'm going to expand the image."
Pritcher had watched the phenomenon of Lens Image expansion before but he still caught his
breath. It was like being at the visiplate of a spaceship storming through a horribly crowded
Galaxy without entering hyperspace. The stars diverged towards them from a common center,
flared outwards and tumbled off the edge of the screen. Single points became double, then
globular. Hazy patches dissolved into myriad points. And always that illusion of motion.
Channis spoke through it all, "You'll notice that we are moving along the direct line from Trantor
to Pelot's Nebula, so that in effect we are still looking at a stellar orientation equivalent to that of
Trantor. There is probably a slight error because of the gravitic deviation of light that I haven't
the math to calculate for, but I'm sure it can't be significant."
The darkness was spreading over the screen. As the rate of magnification slowed, the stars
slipped off the four ends of the screen in a regretful leave-taking. At the rims of the growing
nebula, the brilliant universe of stars shone abruptly in token for that light which was merely
hidden behind the swirling unradiating atom fragments of sodium and calcium that filled cubic
parsecs of space.
And Channis pointed again, "This has been called 'The Mouth' by the inhabitants of that region
of space. And that is significant because it is only from the Trantorian orientation that it looks
like a mouth." What he indicated was a rift in the body of the Nebula, shaped like a ragged,
grinning mouth in profile, outlined by the glazing glory of the starlight with which it was filled.
"Follow The Mouth.'" said Channis. "Follow 'The Mouth' towards the gullet as it narrows down to
a thin, splintering line of light.
Again the screen expanded a trifle, until the Nebula stretched away from "The Mouth" to block
off all the screen but that narrow trickle and Channis' finger silently followed it down, to where it
straggled to a halt, and then, as his finger continued moving onward, to a spot where one single
star sparked lonesomely; and there his finger halted, for beyond that was blackness,
unrelieved.
"'Star's End,'" said the young man, simply. "The fabric of the Nebula is thin there and the light of
that one star finds its way through in just that one direction – to shine on Trantor."
"You're tying to tell me that–" the voice of the Mule's general died in suspicion.
"I'm not trying. That is Tazenda – Star's End."
The lights went on. The Lens flicked off. Pritcher reached Channis in three long strides, "What
made you think of this?"
And Channis leaned back in his chair with a queerly puzzled expression on his face. "It was
accidental. I'd like to take intellectual credit for this, but it was only accidental. In any case,
however it happens, it fits. According to our references, Tazenda is an oligarchy. It rules
twenty-seven inhabited planets. It is not advanced scientifically. And most of all, it is an obscure
world that has adhered to a strict neutrality in the local politics of that stellar region, and is not
expansionist. I think we ought to see it."
"Have you informed the Mule of this?"
"No. Nor shall we. We're in space now, about to make the first hop."
Pritcher, in sudden horror, sprang to the visiplate. Cold space met his eyes when he adjusted it.
He gazed fixedly at the view, then turned. Automatically, his hand reached for the hard,
comfortable curve of the butt of his blaster.
"By whose order?"
"By my order, general"– it was the first time Channis had ever used the other's title –"while I
was engaging you here. You probably felt no acceleration, because it came at the moment I
was expanding the field of the Lens and you undoubtedly imagined it to be an illusion of the
apparent star motion."
"Why? Just what are you doing? What was the point of your nonsense about Tazenda, then?"
"That was no nonsense. I was completely serious. We're going there. We left today because
we were scheduled to leave three days from now. General, you don't believe there is a Second
Foundation, and I do. You are merely following the Mule's orders without faith; I recognize a
serious danger. The Second Foundation has now had five years to prepare. How they've
prepared, I don't know, but what if they have agents on Kalgan. If I carry about in my mind the
knowledge of the whereabouts of the Second Foundation, they may discover that. My life might
be no longer safe, and I have a great affection for my life. Even on a thin and remote possibility
such as that, I would rather play safe. So no one knows of Tazenda but you, and you found out
only after we were out in space. And even so, there is the question of the crew." Channis was
smiling again, ironically, in obviously complete control of the situation.
Pritcher's hand fell away from his blaster, and for a moment a vague discomfort pierced him.
What kept him from action? What deadened him? There was a time when he was a rebellious
and unpromoted captain of the First Foundation's commercial empire, when it would have been
himself rather than Channis who would have taken prompt and daring action such as that. Was
the Mule right? Was his controlled mind so concerned with obedience as to lose initiative? He
felt a thickening despondency drive him down into a strange lassitude.
He said, "Well done! However, you will consult me in the future before making decisions of this
nature."
The flickering signal caught his attention.
"That's the engine room," said Channis, casually. "They warmed up on five minutes' notice and
I asked them to let me know if there was any trouble. Want to hold the fort?"
Pritcher nodded mutely, and cogitated in the sudden loneliness on the evils of approaching fifty.
The visiplate was sparsely starred. The main body of the Galaxy misted one end. What if he
were free of the Mule's influence–
But he recoiled in horror at the thought.
Chief Engineer Huxlani looked sharply at the young, ununiformed man who carried himself with
the assurance of a Fleet officer and seemed to be in a position of authority. Huxlani, as a
regular Fleet man from the days his chin had dripped milk, generally confused authority with
specific insignia.
But the Mule had appointed this man, and the Mule was, of course, the last word. The only
word for that matter. Not even subconsciously did he question that. Emotional control went
deep.
He handed Channis the little oval object without a word.
Channis hefted it, and smiled engagingly.
"You're a Foundation man, aren't you, chief?"
"Yes, sir. I served in the Foundation Fleet eighteen years before the First Citizen took over."
"Foundation training in engineering?"
"Qualified Technician, First Class – Central School on Anacreon."
"Good enough. And you found this on the communication circuit, where I asked you to look?"
"Yes, Sir."
"Does it belong there?"
"No, Sir."
"Then what is it?"
"A hypertracer, sir."
"That's not enough. I'm not a Foundation man. What is it?"
"It's a device to allow the ship to be traced through hyperspace."
"In other words we can be followed anywhere."
"Yes, Sir."
"All right. It's a recent invention, isn't it? It was developed by one of the Research Institutes set
up by the First Citizen, wasn't it?"
"I believe so, Sir."
"And its workings are a government secret. Right?"
"I, believe so, Sir."
"Yet here it is. Intriguing."
Channis tossed the hypertracer methodically from hand to hand for a few seconds. Then,
sharply, he held it out, "Take it, then, and put it back exactly where you found it and exactly how
you found it. Understand? And then forget this incident. Entirely!"
The chief choked down his near-automatic salute, turned sharply and left.
The ship bounded through the Galaxy, its path a wide-spaced dotted line through the stars. The
dots, referred to, were the scant stretches of ten to sixty light-seconds spent in normal space
and between them stretched the hundred-and-up light-year gaps that represented the "hops"
through hyperspace.
Bail Channis sat at the control panel of the Lens and felt again the involuntary surge of
near-worship at the contemplation of it.
He was not a Foundation man and the interplay of forces at the twist of a knob or the breaking
of a contact was not second nature to him.
Not that the Lens ought quite to bore even a Foundation man. Within its unbelievably compact
body were enough electronic circuits to pin- point accurately a hundred million separate stars in
exact relationship to each other. And as if that were not a feat in itself, it was further capable of
translating any given portion of the Galactic Field along any of the three spatial axes or to rotate
any portion of the Field about a center.
It was because of that, that the Lens had performed a near-revolution in interstellar travel. In
the younger days of interstellar travel, the calculation of each "hop" through hyperspace meant
any amount of work from a day to a week – and the larger portion of such work was the more or
less precise calculation of "Ship's Position" on the Galactic scale of reference. Essentially that
meant the accurate observation of at least three widely-spaced stars, the position of which, with
reference to the arbitrary Galactic triple-zero, were known.
And it is the word "known," that is the catch. To any who know the star field well from one
certain reference point, stars are as individual as people. Jump ten parsecs, however, and not
even your own sun is recognizable. It may not even be visible.
The answer was, of course, spectroscopic analysis. For centuries, the main object of interstellar
engineering was the analysis of the "light signature" of more and more stars in greater and
greater detail. With this, and the growing precision of the "hop" itself, standard routes of travel
through the Galaxy were adopted and interstellar travel became less of an art and more of a
science.
And yet, even under the Foundation with improved calculating machines and a new method of
mechanically scanning the star field for a known "light signature," it sometimes took days to
locate three stars and then calculate position in regions not previously familiar to the pilot.
It was the Lens that changed all that. For one thing it required only a single known star. For
another, even a space tyro such as Channis could operate it.
The nearest sizable star at the moment was Vincetori, according to "hop" calculations, and on
the visiplate now, a bright star was centered. Channis hoped that it was Vincetori.
The field screen of the Lens was thrown directly next that of the visiplate and with careful
fingers, Channis punched out the co-ordinates of Vincetori. He closed a relay, and the star field
sprang to bright view. In it, too, a bright star was centered, but otherwise there seemed no
relationship. He adjusted the Lens along the Z-Axis and expanded the Field to where the
photometer showed both centered stars to be of equal brightness.
Channis looked for a second star, sizably bright, on the visiplate and found one on the field
screen to correspond. Slowly, he rotated the screen to similar angular deflection. He twisted his
mouth and rejected the result with a grimace. Again he rotated and another bright star was
brought into position, and a third. And then he grinned. That did it. Perhaps a specialist with
trained relationship perception might have clicked first try, but he'd settle for three.
That was the adjustment. In the final step, the two fields overlapped and merged into a sea of
not-quite-rightness. Most of the stars were close doubles. But the fine adjustment did not take
long. The double stars melted together, one field remained, and the "Ship's Position" could now
be read directly off the dials. The entire procedure had taken less than half an hour.
Channis found Han Pritcher in his private quarters. The general was quite apparently preparing
for bed. He looked up.
"News?"
"Not particularly. We’ll be at Tazenda in another hop."
"I know."
"I don't want to bother you if you're turning in, but have you looked through the film we picked
up in Cil?"
Han Pritcher cast a disparaging look at the article in question, where it lay in its black case
upon his low bookshelf, "Yes."
"And what do you think?"
"I think that if there was ever any science to History, it has been quite lost in this region of the
Galaxy."
Channis grinned broadly, "I know what you mean. Rather barren, isn't it?"
"Not if you enjoy personal chronicles of rulers. Probably unreachable, I should say, in both
directions. Where history concerns mainly personalities, the drawings become either black or
white according to the interests of the writer. I find it all remarkably useless."
"But there is talk about Tazenda. That's the point I tried to make when I gave you the film. It's
the only one I could find that even mentioned them."
"All right. They have good rulers and bad. They've conquered a few planets, won some battles,
lost a few. There is nothing distinctive about them. I don't think much of your theory, Channis."
"But you've missed a few points. Didn't you notice that they never formed coalitions? They
always remained completely outside the politics of this corner of the star swarm. As you say,
they conquered a few planets, but then they stopped – and that without any startling defeat of
consequence. It's just as if they spread out enough to protect themselves, but not enough to
attract attention."
"Very well," came the unemotional response. "I have no objection to landing. At the worst – a
little lost time."
"Oh, no. At the worst – complete defeat. If it is the Second Foundation. Remember it would be
a world of space-knows-how-many Mules."
"What do you plan to do?"
"Land on some minor subject planet. Find out as much as we can about Tazenda first, then
improvise from that."
"All right. No objection. If you don't mind now, I would like the light out."
Channis left with a wave of his hand.
And in the darkness of a tiny room in an island of driving metal lost in the vastness of space,
General Han Pritcher remained awake, following the thoughts that led him through such
fantastic reaches.
If everything he had so painfully decided were true – and how all the facts were beginning to fit
– then Tazenda was the Second Foundation. There was no way out. But how? How?
Could it be Tazenda? An ordinary world? One without distinction? A slum lost amid the
wreckage of an Empire? A splinter among the fragments? He remembered, as from a distance,
the Mule's shriveled face and his thin voice as he used to speak of the old Foundation
psychologist, Ebling Mis, the one man who had – maybe – learned the secret of the Second
Foundation.
Pritcher recalled the tension of the Mule's words: "It was as if astonishment had overwhelmed
Mis. It was as though something about the Second Foundation had surpassed all his
expectations, had driven in a direction completely different from what he might have assumed.
If I could only have read his thoughts rather than his emotions. Yet the emotions were plain –
and above everything else was this vast surprise."
Surprise was the keynote. Something supremely astonishing! And now came this boy, this
grinning youngster, glibly joyful about Tazenda and its undistinguished subnormality. And he
had to be right. He had to. Otherwise, nothing made sense.
Pritcher's last conscious thought had a touch of grimness. That hypertracer along the Etheric
tube was still there. He had checked it one hour back, with Channis well out of the way.
SECOND INTERLUDE
It was a casual meeting in the anteroom of the Council Chamber – just a few moments before
passing into the Chamber to take up the business of the day – and the few thoughts flashed
back and forth quickly.
"So the Mule is on his way."
"That's what I hear, too. Risky! Mighty risky!"
"Not if affairs adhere to the functions set up."
"The Mule is not an ordinary man – and it is difficult to manipulate his chosen instruments
without detection by him. The controlled minds are difficult to touch. They say he's caught on to
a few cases."
"Yes, I don't see how that can be avoided."
"Uncontrolled minds are easier. But so few are in positions of authority under him–"
They entered the Chamber. Others of the Second Foundation followed them.
3
Two Men and a Peasant
Rossem is one of those marginal worlds usually neglected in Galactic history and scarcely ever
obtruding itself upon the notice of men of the myriad happier planets.
In the latter days of the Galactic Empire, a few political prisoners had inhabited its wastes, while
an observatory and a small Naval garrison served to keep it from complete desertion. Later, in
the evil days of strife, even before the time of Hari Seldon, the weaker sort of men, tired of the
periodic decades of insecurity and danger; weary of sacked planets and a ghostly succession
of ephemeral emperors making their way to the Purple for a few wicked, fruitless years – these
men fled the populated centers and sought shelter in the barren nooks of the Galaxy.
Along the chilly wastes of Rossem, villages huddled. Its sun was a small ruddy niggard that
clutched its dribble of heat to itself, while snow beat thinly down for nine months of the year.
The tough native grain lay dormant in the soil those snow-filled months, then grew and ripened
in almost panic speed, when the sun's reluctant radiation brought the temperature to nearly
fifty.
Small, goatlike animals cropped the grasslands, kicking the thin snow aside with tiny, tri-hooved
feet.
The men of Rossem had, thus, their bread and their milk – and when they could spare an
animal – even their meat. The darkly ominous forests that gnarled their way over half of the
equatorial region of the planet supplied a tough, fine-grained wood for housing. This wood,
together with certain furs and minerals, was even worth exporting, and the ships of the Empire
came at times and brought in exchange farm machinery, atomic heaters, even televisor sets.
The last was not really incongruous, for the long winter imposed a lonely hibernation upon the
peasant.
Imperial history flowed past the peasants of Rossem. The trading ships might bring news in
impatient spurts; occasionally new fugitives would arrive – at one time, a relatively large group
arrived in a body and remained – and these usually had news of the Galaxy.
It was then that the Rossemites learned of sweeping battles and decimated populations or of
tyrannical emperors and rebellious viceroys. And they would sigh and shake their heads, and
draw their fur collars closer about their bearded faces as they sat about the village square in
the weak sun and philosophized on the evil of men.
Then after a while, no trading ships arrived at all, and life grew harder. Supplies of foreign, soft
food, of tobacco, of machinery stopped. Vague word from scraps gathered on the televisor
brought increasingly disturbing news. And finally it spread that Trantor had been sacked. The
great capital world of all the Galaxy, the splendid, storied, unapproachable and incomparable
home of the emperors had been despoiled and ruined and brought to utter destruction.
It was something inconceivable, and to many of the peasants of Rossem, scratching away at
their fields, it might well seem that the end of the Galaxy was at hand.
And then one day not unlike other days a ship arrived again. The old men of each village
nodded wisely and lifted their old eyelids to whisper that thus it had been in their father's time –
but it wasn't, quite.
This ship was not an Imperial ship. The glowing Spaceship-and-Sun of the Empire was missing
from its prow. It was a stubby affair made of scraps of older ships – and the men within called
themselves soldiers of Tazenda.
The peasants were confused. They had not heard of Tazenda, but they greeted the soldiers
nevertheless in the traditional fashion of hospitality. The newcomers inquired closely as to the
nature of the planet, the number of its inhabitants, the number of its cities – a word mistaken by
the peasants to mean "villages" to the confusion of all concerned – its type of economy and so
on.
Other ships came and proclamations were issued all over the world that Tazenda was now the
ruling world, that tax-collecting stations would be established girdling the equator – the
inhabited region – that percentages of grain and furs according to certain numerical formulae
would be collected annually.
The Rossemites had blinked solemnly, uncertain of the word "taxes." When collection time
came, many had paid, or had stood by in confusion while the uniformed, other-wordlings loaded
the harvested corn and the pelts on to the broad ground-cars.
Here and there indignant peasants banded together and brought out ancient hunting weapons
– but of this nothing ever came. Grumblingly they had disbanded when the men of Tazenda
came and with dismay watched their hard struggle for existence become harder.
But a new equilibrium was reached. The Tazendian governor lived dourly in the village of
Gentri, from which all Rossemites were barred. He and the officials under him were dim
otherworld beings that rarely impinged on the Rossemite ken. The tax-farmers, Rossemites in
the employ of Tazenda, came periodically, but they were creatures of custom now – and the
peasant had learned how to hide his grain and drive his cattle into the forest, and refrain from
having his hut appear too ostentatiously prosperous. Then with a dull, uncomprehending
expression he would greet all sharp questioning as to his assets by merely pointing at what
they could see.
Even that grew less, and taxes decreased, almost as If Tazenda wearied of extorting pennies
from such a world.
Trading sprang up and perhaps Tazenda found that more profitable. The men of Rossem no
longer received in exchange the polished creations of the Empire, but even Tazendian
machines and Tazendian food was better than the native stuff. And there were clothes for the
women of other than gray home-spun, which was a very important thing.
So once again, Galactic history glided past peacefully enough, and the peasants scrabbIed life
out of the hard soil.
Narovi blew into his beard as he stepped out of his cottage.
The first snows were sifting across the hard ground and the sky was a dull, overcast pink. He
squinted carefully upward and decided that no real storm was in sight. He could travel to Gentri
without much trouble and get rid of his surplus grain in return for enough canned foods to last
the winter.
He roared back through the door, which he opened a crack for the purpose: "Has the car been
fed its fuel, yunker?"
A voice shouted from within, and then Narovi's oldest son, his short, red beard not yet
completely outgrown its boyish sparseness, joined him.
"The car," he said, sullenly, "is fueled and rides well, but for the bad condition of the axles. For
that I am of no blame. I have told you it needs expert repairs."
The old man stepped back and surveyed his son through lowering eyebrows, then thrust his
hairy chin outward: "And is the fault mine? Where and in what manner may I achieve expert
repairs? Has the harvest then been anything but scanty for five years? Have my herds escaped
the pest? Have the pelts climbed of themselves–"
"Narovi!" The well-known voice from within stopped him in mid-word. He grumbled, "Well, well –
and now your mother must insert herself into the affairs of a father and his son. Bring out the
car, and see to it that the storage trailers are securely attached."
He pounded his gloved hands together, and looked upward again. The dimly-ruddy clouds were
gathering and the gray sky that showed in the rifts bore no warmth. The sun was hidden.
He was at the point of looking away, when his dropping eyes caught and his finger almost
automatically rose on high while his mouth fell open in a shout, in complete disregard of the
cold air.
"Wife," he called vigorously, "Old woman – come here."
An indignant head appeared at a window. The woman's eyes followed his finger, gaped. With a
cry, she dashed down the wooden stairs, snatching up an old wrap and a square of linen as
she went. She emerged with the linen wrapped insecurely over her head and ears, and the
wrap dangling from her shoulders.
She snuffled: "It is a ship from outer space."
And Narovi remarked impatiently: "And what else could it be? We have visitors, old woman,
visitors!"
The ship was sinking slowly to a landing on the bare frozen field in the northern portions of
Narovi's farm.
"But what shall we do?" gasped the woman. "Can we offer these people hospitality? Is the dirt
floor of our hovel to be theirs and the pickings of last week's hoecake?"
"Shall they then go to our neighbors?" Narovi purpled past the crimson induced by the cold and
his arms in their sleek fur covering lunged out and seized the woman's brawny shoulders.
"Wife of my soul," he purred, "you will take the two chairs from our room downstairs; you will
see that a fat youngling is slaughtered and roasted with tubers; you will bake a fresh hoecake. I
go now to greet these men of power from outer space ... and ... and–" He paused, placed his
great cap awry, and scratched hesitantly. "Yes, I shall bring my jug of brewed grain as well.
Hearty drink is pleasant."
The woman's mouth had flapped idly during this speech. Nothing came out. And when that
stage passed, it was only a discordant screech that issued.
Narovi lifted a finger, "Old woman, what was it the village Elders said a se'nnight since? Eh?
Stir your memory. The Elders went from farm to farm – themselves! Imagine the importance of
it! – to ask us that should any ships from outer space land, they were to be informed
immediately on the orders of the governor.
"And now shall I not seize the opportunity to win into the good graces of those in power?
Regard that ship. Have you ever seen its like? These men from the outer worlds are rich, great.
The governor himself sends such urgent messages concerning them that the Elders walk from
farm to farm in the cooling weather. Perhaps the message is sent throughout all Rossem that
these men are greatly desired by the Lords of Tazenda – and it is on my farm that they are
landing."
He fairly hopped for anxiety, "The proper hospitality now – the mention of my name to the
governor – and what may not be ours?"
His wife was suddenly aware of the cold biting through her thin house-clothing. She leaped
towards the door, shouting over her shoulders, "Leave then quickly."
But she was speaking to a man who was even then racing towards the segment of the horizon
against which the ship sank.
Neither the cold of the world, nor its bleak, empty spaces worried General Han Pritcher. Nor the
poverty of their surroundings, nor the perspiring peasant himself.
What did bother him was the question of the wisdom of their tactics? He and Channis were
alone here.
The ship, left in space, could take care of itself in ordinary circumstances, but still, he felt
unsafe. It was Channis, of course, who was responsible for this move. He looked across at the
young man and caught him winking cheerfully at the gap in the furred partition, in which a
woman's peeping eyes and gaping mouth momentarily appeared.
Channis, at least, seemed completely at ease. That fact Pritcher savored with a vinegary
satisfaction. His game had not much longer to proceed exactly as he wished it. Yet, meanwhile
their wrist ultrawave sender-receivers were their only connection with the ship.
And then the peasant host smiled enormously and bobbed his head several times and said in a
voice oily with respect, "Noble Lords, I crave leave to tell you that my eldest son – a good,
worthy lad whom my poverty prevents from educating as his wisdom deserves – has informed
me that the Elders will arrive soon. I trust your stay here has been as pleasant as my humble
means – for I am poverty-stricken, though a hard-working, honest, and humble farmer, as
anyone here will tell you – could afford."
"Elders?" said Channis, lightly. "The chief men of the region here?"
"So they are, Noble Lords, and honest, worthy men all of them, for our entire village is known
throughout Rossem as a just and righteous spot – though living is hard and the returns of the
fields and forests meager. Perhaps you will mention to the Elders, Noble Lords, of my respect
and honor for travelers and it may happen that they will request a new motor wagon for our
household as the old one can scarcely creep and upon the remnant of it depends our
livelihood."
He looked humbly eager and Han Pritcher nodded with thee properly aloof condescension
required of the role of "Noble, Lords" bestowed upon them.
"A report of your hospitality shall reach the ears of your Elders."
Pritcher seized the next moments of isolation to speak to the apparently half-sleeping Channis.
"I am not particularly fond of this meeting of the Elders," he said. "Have you any thoughts on
the subject?"
Channis seemed surprised. "No. What worries you?"
"It seems we have better things to do than to become conspicuous here.'
Channis spoke hastily, in a low monotoned voice: "It may be necessary to risk becoming
conspicuous in our next moves. We won't find the type of men we want, Pritcher, by simply
reaching out a hand into a dark bag and groping. Men who rule by tricks of the mind need not
necessarily be men in obvious power. In the first place, the psychologists of the Second
Foundation are probably a very small minority of the total population, just as on your own First
Foundation, the technicians and scientists formed a minority. The ordinary inhabitants are
probably just that – very ordinary. The psychologists may even be well hidden, and the men in
the apparently ruling position, may honestly think they are the true masters. Our solution to that
problem may be found here on this frozen lump of a planet."
"I don't follow that at all."
"Why, see here, it's obvious enough. Tazenda is probably a huge world of millions or hundreds
of millions. How could we identify the psychologists among them and be able to report truly to
the Mule that we have located the Second Foundation? But here, on this tiny peasant world
and subject planet, an the Tazendian rulers, our host informs us, are concentrated in their chief
village of Gentri. There may be only a few hundred of them there, Pritcher, and among them
must be one or more of the men of the Second Foundation. We will go there eventually, but let
us see the Elders first – it's a logical step on the way."
They drew apart easily, as their black-bearded host tumbled into the room again, obviously
agitated.
"Noble Lords, the Elders are arriving. I crave leave to beg you once more to mention a word,
perhaps, on my behalf–" He almost bent double in a paroxysm of fawning.
"We shall certainly remember you," said Channis. "Are these your Elders?"
They apparently were. There were three.
One approached. He bowed with a dignified respect and said: "We are honored. Transportation
has been provided, Respected sirs, and we hope for the pleasure of your company at our
Meeting Hall."
THIRD INTERLUDE
The First Speaker gazed wistfully at the night sky. Wispy clouds scudded across the faint
stargleams. Space looked actively hostile. It was cold and awful at best but now it contained
that strange creature, the Mule, and the very content seemed to darken and thicken it into
ominous threat.
The meeting was over. It had not been long. There had been the doubts and questionings
inspired by the difficult mathematical problem of dealing with a mental mutant of uncertain
makeup. All the extreme permutations had had to be considered.
Were they even yet certain? Somewhere in this region of space – within reaching distance as
Galactic spaces go – was the Mule. What would he do?
It was easy enough to handle his men. They reacted – and were reacting – according to plan.
But what of the Mule himself?
4
Two Men and the Elders
The Elders of this particular region of Rossem were not exactly what one might have expected.
They were not a mere extrapolation of the peasantry; older, more authoritative, less friendly.
Not at all.
The dignity that had marked them at first meeting had grown in impression till it had reached
the mark of being their predominant characteristic.
They sat about their oval table like so many grave and slow-moving thinkers. Most were a trifle
past their physical prime, though the few who possessed beards wore them short and neatly
arranged. Still, enough appeared younger than forty to make it quite obvious that "Elders" was
a term of respect rather than entirely a literal description of age.
The two from outer space were at the head of the table and in the solemn silence that
accompanied a rather frugal meal that seemed ceremonious rather than nourishing, absorbed
the new, contrasting atmosphere.
After the meal and after one or two respectful remarks – too short and simple to be called
speeches – had been made by those of the Elders apparently held most in esteem, an
informality forced itself upon the assembly.
It was as if the dignity of greeting foreign personages had finally given way to the amiable rustic
qualities of curiosity and friendliness.
They crowded around the two strangers and the flood of questions came.
They asked if it were difficult to handle a spaceship, how many men were required for the job, if
better motors could be made for their ground-cars, if it was true that it rarely snowed on other
worlds as was said to be the case with Tazenda, how many people lived on their world, if it was
as large as Tazenda, if it was far away, how their clothes were woven and what gave them the
metallic shimmer, why they did not wear furs, if they shaved every day, what sort of stone that
was in Pritcher's ring – The list stretched out.
And almost always the questions were addressed to Pritcher as though, as the elder, they
automatically invested him with the greater authority. Pritcher found himself forced to answer at
greater and greater length. It was like an immersion in a crowd of children. Their questions
were those of utter and disarming wonder. Their eagerness to know was completely irresistible
and would not be denied.
Pritcher explained that spaceships were not difficult to handle and that crews varied with the
size, from one to many, that the motors of their ground-cars were unknown in detail to him but
could doubtless be improved, that the climates of worlds varied almost infinitely, that many
hundreds of millions lived on his world but that it was far smaller and more insignificant than the
great empire of Tazenda, that their clothes were woven of silicone plastics in which metallic
luster was artificially produced by proper orientation of the surface molecules, and that they
could be artificially heated so that furs were unnecessary, that they shaved every day, that the
stone in his ring was an amethyst. The list stretched out. He found himself thawing to these
naive provincials against his will.
And always as he answered there was a rapid chatter among the Elders, as though they
debated the information gained. It was difficult to follow these inner discussions of theirs for
they lapsed into their own accented version of the universal Galactic language that, through
long separation from the currents of living speech, had become archaic.
Almost, one might say, their curt comments among themselves hovered on the edge of
understanding, but just managed to elude the clutching tendrils of comprehension.
Until finally Channis interrupted to say, "Good sirs, you must answer us for a while, for we are
strangers and would be very much interested to know all we can of Tazenda."
And what happened then was that a great silence fell and each of the hitherto voluble Elders
grew silent. Their hands, which had been moving in such rapid and delicate accompaniment to
their words as though to give them greater scope and varied shades of meaning, fell suddenly
limp. They stared furtively at one another, apparently quite willing each to let the other have all
the floor.
Pritcher interposed quickly, "My companion asks this in friendliness, for the fame of Tazenda
fills the Galaxy and we, of course, shall inform the governor of the loyalty and love of the Elders
of Rossem."
No sigh of relief was heard but faces brightened. An Elder stroked his beard with thumb and
forefinger, straightening its slight curl with a gentle pressure, and said: "We are faithful servants
of the Lords of Tazenda."
Pritcher's annoyance at Channis' bald question subsided. It was apparent, at least, that the age
that he had felt creeping over him of late had not yet deprived him of his own capacity for
making smooth the blunders of others.
He continued: "We do not know, in our far part of the universe, much of the past history of the
Lords of Tazenda. We presume they have ruled benevolently here for a long time."
The same Elder who spoke before, answered. In a soft, automatic way he had become
spokesman. He said: "Not the grandfather of the oldest can recall a time in which the Lords
were absent."
"It has been a time of peace?"
"It has been a time of peace!" He hesitated. "The governor is a strong and powerful Lord who
would not hesitate to punish traitors. None of us are traitors, of course."
"He has punished some in the past, I imagine, as they deserve."
Again hesitation, "None here have ever been traitors, or our fathers or our fathers' fathers. But
on other worlds, there have been such, and death followed for them quickly. It is not good to
think of for we are humble men who are poor farmers and not concerned with matters of
politics."
The anxiety in his voice, the universal concern in the eyes of all of them was obvious.
Pritcher said smoothly: "Could you inform us as to how we can arrange an audience with your
governor."
And instantly an element of sudden bewilderment entered the situation.
For after a long moment, the elder said: "Why, did you not know? The governor will be here
tomorrow. He has expected you. It has been a great honor for us. We ... we hope earnestly that
you will report to him satisfactorily as to our loyalty to him."
Pritcher's smile scarcely twitched. "Expected us?"
The Elder looked wonderingly from one to the other. "Why ... it is now a week since we have
been waiting for you."
Their quarters were undoubtedly luxurious for the world. Pritcher had lived in worse. Channis
showed nothing but indifference to externals.
But there was an element of tension between them of a different nature than hitherto. Pritcher,
felt the time approaching for a definite decision and yet there was still the desirability of
additional waiting. To see the governor first would be to increase the gamble to dangerous
dimensions and yet to win that gamble might multi-double the winnings. He felt a surge of
anger at the slight crease between Channis' eyebrows, the delicate uncertainty with which the
young man's lower lip presented itself to an upper tooth. He detested the useless play-acting
and yearned for an end to it.
He said: "We seem to be anticipated."
'Yes," said Channis, simply.
"Just that? You have no contribution of greater pith to make. We come here and find that the
governor expects us. Presumably we shall find from the governor that Tazenda itself expects
us. Of what value then is our entire mission?"
Channis looked up, without endeavoring to conceal the weary note in his voice: "To expect us
is one thing; to know who we are and what we came for, is another."
"Do you expect to conceal these things from men of the Second Foundation?"
"Perhaps. Why not? Are you ready to throw your hand in? Suppose our ship was detected in
space. Is it unusual for a realm to maintain frontier observation posts? Even if we were ordinary
strangers, we would be of interest."
"Sufficient interest for a governor to come to us rather than the reverse?'
Channis shrugged: "We’ll have to meet that problem later. Let us see what this governor is
like."
Pritcher bared his teeth in a bloodless kind of scowl. The situation was becoming ridiculous.
Channis proceeded with an artificial animation: "At least we know one thing. Tazenda is the
Second Foundation or a million shreds of evidence are unanimously pointing the wrong way.
How do you interpret the obvious terror in which these natives hold Tazenda? I see no signs of
political domination. Their groups of Elders apparently meet freely and without interference of
any sort. The taxation they speak of doesn't seem at all extensive to me or efficiently carried
through. The natives speak much of poverty but seem sturdy and well-fed. The houses are
uncouth and their villages rude, but are obviously adequate for the purpose.
"In fact, the world fascinates me. I have never seen a more forbidding one, yet I am convinced
there is no suffering among the population and that their uncomplicated lives manage to
contain a well-balanced happiness lacking in the sophisticated populations of the advanced
centers."
"Are you an admirer of peasant virtues, then?"
"The stars forbid." Channis seemed amused at the idea. "I merely point out the significance of
all this. Apparently, Tazenda is an efficient administrator – efficient in a sense far different from
the efficiency of the old Empire or of the First Foundation, or even of our own Union. All these
have brought mechanical efficiency to their subjects at the cost of more intangible values.
Tazenda brings happiness and sufficiency. Don't you see that the whole orientation of their
domination is different? It is not physical, but psychological."
"Really?" Pritcher, allowed himself irony. "And the terror with which the Elders spoke of the
punishment of treason by these kind hearted psychologist administrators? How does that suit
your thesis?"
"Were they the objects of the punishment? They speak of punishment only of others. It is as if
knowledge of punishment has been so well implanted in them that punishment itself need never
be used. The proper mental attitudes are so inserted into their minds that I am certain that not a
Tazendian soldier exists on the planet. Don't you see all this?"
"I’ll see perhaps," said Pritcher, coldly, "when I see the governor. And what, by the way, if our
mentalities are handled?"
Channis replied with brutal contempt: "You should be accustomed to that."
Pritcher whitened perceptibly, and, with an effort, turned away. They spoke to one another no
more that day.
It was in the silent windlessness of the frigid night, as he listened to the soft, sleeping motions
of the other, that Pritcher silently adjusted his wrist-transmitter to the ultrawave region for which
Channis' was unadjustable and, with noiseless touches of his fingernail, contacted the ship.
The answer came in little periods of noiseless vibration that barely lifted themselves above the
sensory threshold.
Twice Pritcher asked: "Any communications at all yet?"
Twice the answer came: "None. We wait always."
He got out of bed. It was cold in the room and he pulled the furry blanket around him as he sat
in the chair and stared out at the crowding stars so different in the brightness and complexity of
their arrangement from the even fog of the Galactic Lens that dominated the night sky of his
native Periphery.
Somewhere there between the stars was the answer to the complications that overwhelmed
him, and he felt the yearning for that solution to arrive and end things.
For a moment he wondered again if the Mule were right – if Conversion had robbed him of the
firm sharp edge of self-reliance. Or was it simply age and the fluctuations of these last years?
He didn't really care.
He was tired.
The governor of Rossem arrived with minor ostentation. His only companion was the uniformed
man at the controls of the ground-car.
The ground-car itself was of lush design but to Pritcher it appeared inefficient. It turned
clumsily; more than once it apparently balked at what might have been a too-rapid change of
gears. It was obvious at once from its design that it ran on chemical, and not on atomic, fuel.
The Tazendian governor stepped softly on to the thin layer of snow and advanced between two
lines of respectful Elders. He did not look at them but entered quickly. They followed after him.
From the quarters assigned to them, the two men of the Mule's Union watched. He – the
governor – was thickset, rather stocky, short, unimpressive.
But what of that?
Pritcher cursed himself for a failure of nerve. His face, to be sure, remained icily calm. There
was no humiliation before Channis – but he knew very well that his blood pressure had
heightened and his throat had become dry.
It was not a case of physical fear. He was not one of those dull-witted, unimaginative men of
nerveless meat who were too stupid ever to be afraid – but physical fear he could account for
and discount.
But this was different. It was the other fear.
He glanced quickly at Channis. The young man glanced idly at the nails of one hand and poked
leisurely at some trifling unevenness.
Something inside Pritcher became vastly indignant. What had Channis to fear of mental
handling?
Pritcher caught a mental breath and tried to think back. How had he been before the Mule had
Converted him from the die-hard Democrat that he was. It was hard to remember. He could not
place himself mentally. He could not break the clinging wires that bound him emotionally to the
Mule. Intellectually, he could remember that he had once tried to assassinate the Mule but not
for all the straining he could endure, could he remember his emotions at the time. That might
be the self-defense of his own mind, however, for at the intuitive thought of what those
emotions might have been – not realizing the details, but merely comprehending the drift of it –
his stomach grew queasy.
What if the governor tampered with his mind?
What if the insubstantial mental tendrils of a Second Foundationer insinuated itself down the
emotional crevices of his makeup and pulled them apart and rejoined them?
There had been no sensation the first time. There had been no pain, no mental jar – not even a
feeling of discontinuity. He had always loved the Mule. If there had ever been a time long
before – as long before as five short years – when he had thought he hadn't loved him, that he
had hated him – that was just a horrid illusion. The thought of that illusion embarrassed him.
But there had been no pain.
Would meeting the governor duplicate that? Would all that had gone before – all his service for
the Mule – all his life's orientation – join the hazy, other-life dream that held the word,
Democracy. The Mule also a dream, and only to Tazenda, his loyalty–
Sharply, he turned away.
There was that strong desire to retch.
And then Channis' voice clashed on his ear, "I think this is it, general."
Pritcher turned again. An Elder had opened the door silently and stood with a dignified and
calm respect upon the threshold.
He said, "His Excellency, Governor of Rossem, in the name of the Lords of Tazenda, is pleased
to present his permission for an audience and request your appearance before him."
"Sure thing," and Channis tightened his belt with a jerk and adjusted a Rossemian hood over
his head.
Pritcher's jaw set. This was the beginning of the real gamble.
The governor of Rossem was not of formidable appearance. For one thing, he was
bareheaded, and his thinning hair, light brown, tending to gray, lent him mildness. His bony
eye-ridges lowered at them, and his eyes, set in a fine network of surrounding wrinkles,
seemed calculating, but his fresh-cropped chin was soft and small and, by the universal
convention of followers of the pseudoscience of reading character by facial bony structure,
seemed "weak."
Pritcher, avoided the eyes and watched the chin. He didn't know whether that would be
effective – if anything would be.
The governor's voice was high-pitched, indifferent: "Welcome to Tazenda. We greet you in
peace. You have eaten?"
His hand – long fingers, gnarled veins – waved almost regally at the U-shaped table.
They bowed and sat down. The governor sat at the outer side of the base of the U, they on the
inner; along both arms sat the double row of silent Elders.
The governor spoke in short, abrupt sentences – praising the food as Tazendian importations –
and it had indeed a quality different if, somehow, not so much better, than the rougher food of
the Elders – disparaging Rossemian weather, referring with an attempt at casualness to the
intricacies of space travel.
Channis talked little. Pritcher not at all.
Then it was over. The small, stewed fruits were finished; the napkins used and discarded, and
the governor leaned back.
His small eyes sparkled.
"I have inquired as to your ship. Naturally, I would like to see that it receives due care and
overhaul. I am told its whereabouts are unknown."
"True." Channis replied lightly. "We have left it in space. It is a large ship, suitable for long
journeys in sometimes hostile regions, and we felt that landing it here might give rise to doubts
as to our peaceful intentions. We preferred to land alone, unarmed."
"A friendly act," commented the governor, without conviction. "A large ship, you say?"
"Not a vessel of war, excellency."
"Ha, hum. Where is it you come from?"
"A small world of the Santanni sector, your excellency. It may be you are not aware of its
existence for it lacks importance. We are interested in establishing trade relationships."
"Trade, eh? And what have you to sell?'
"Machines of all sorts, excellency. In return, food, wood, ores
"Ha, hum." The governor seemed doubtful. "I know little these matters. Perhaps mutual profit
may be arranged. Perhaps, after I have examined your credentials at length – for much
information will be required by my government before matters may proceed, you understand –
and after I have looked over your ship, it would be advisable for you to proceed to Tazenda."
There was no answer to that, and the governor's attitude iced perceptibly.
"It is necessary that I see your ship, however."
Channis said distantly: "The ship, unfortunately, is undergoing repairs at the moment. If your
excellency would not object giving us forty-eight hours, it will be at your service."
"I am not accustomed to waiting."
For the first time, Pritcher met the glare of the other, eye to eye, and his breath exploded softly
inside him. For a moment, he had the sensation of drowning, but then his eyes tore away.
Channis did not waver. He said: "The ship cannot be landed for forty-eight hours, excellency.
We are here and unarmed. Can you doubt our honest intentions?"
There was a long silence, and then the governor said gruffly, "Tell me of the world from which
you come."
That was all. It passed with that. There was no more unpleasantness. The governor, having
fulfilled his official duty, apparently lost interest and the audience died a dull death.
And when it was all over, Pritcher found himself back in their quarters and took stock of himself.
Carefully – holding his breath – he "felt" his emotions. Certainly he seemed no different to
himself, but would he feel any difference? Had he felt different after the Mule's Conversion?
Had not everything seemed natural? As it should have been?
He experimented.
With cold purpose, he shouted inside the silent caverns of his mind, and the shout was, "The
Second Foundation must be discovered and destroyed."
And the emotion that accompanied it was honest hate. There was not as much as a hesitation
involved in it.
And then it was in his mind to substitute the word "Mule" for the phrase "Second Foundation"
and his breath caught at the mere emotion and his tongue clogged.
So far, good.
But had he been handled otherwise – more subtly? Had tiny changes been made? Changes
that he couldn't detect because their very existence warped his judgment.
There was no way to tell.
But he still felt absolute loyalty to the Mule! If that were unchanged, nothing else really
mattered.
He turned his mind to action again. Channis was busy at his end of the room. Pritcher's
thumbnail idled at his wrist communicator.
And then at the response that came he felt a wave of relief surge over him and leave him weak.
The quiet muscles of his face did not betray him, but inside he was shouting with joy – and
when Channis turned to face him, he knew that the farce was about over.
FOURTH INTERLUDE
The two Speakers passed each other on the road and one stopped the other.
"I have word from the First Speaker."
There was a half-apprehensive flicker in the other's eyes. "Intersection point?"
"Yes! May we live to see the dawn!"
5
One Man and the Mule
There was no sign in any of Channis' actions that he was aware of any subtle change in the
attitude of Pritcher, and in their relations to each other. He leaned back on the hard wooden
bench and spread-eagled his feet out in front of him.
"What did you make of the governor?"
Pritcher shrugged: "Nothing at all. He certainly seemed no mental genius to me. A very poor
specimen of the Second Foundation, if that's what he was supposed to be."
"I don't think he was, you know. I'm not sure what to make of it. Suppose you were a Second
Foundationer," Channis grew thoughtful, "what would you do? Suppose you had an idea of our
purpose here. How would you handle us?"
"Conversion, of course."
"Like the Mule?" Channis looked up, sharply. "Would we know if they had converted us? I
wonder– And what if they were simply psychologists, but very clever ones."
"In that case, I'd have us killed rather quickly."
"And our ship? No." Channis wagged a forefinger. "We're playing a bluff, Pritcher, old man. It
can only be a bluff. Even if they have emotional control down pat, we – you and I – are only
fronts. It's the Mule they must fight, and they're being just as careful of us as we are of them.
I'm assuming that they know who we are."
Pritcher, stared coldly: "What do you intend doing?"
"Wait." The word was bitten off. "Let them come to us. They're worried, maybe about the ship,
but probably about the Mule. They bluffed with the governor. It didn't work. We stayed pat. The
next person they'll send will be a Second Foundationer, and he’ll propose a deal of some sort."
"And then?"
"And then we make the deal."
"I don't think so."
"Because you think it will double-cross the Mule? It won't."
"No, the Mule could handle your double-crosses, any you could invent. But I still don't think so."
"Because you think then we couldn't double-cross the Foundationers?"
"Perhaps not. But that’s not the reason."
Channis let his glance drop to what the other held in his fist, and said grimly: "You mean that's
the reason."
Pritcher cradled his blaster, "That's right. You are under arrest."
"Why?"
"For treason to the First Citizen of the Union."
Channis' lips hardened upon one another: "What's going on?"
"Treason! As I said. And correction of the matter, on my part."
"Your proof? Or evidence, assumptions, daydreams? Are you mad?"
"No. Are you? Do you think the Mule sends out unweaned youngsters on ridiculous
swashbuckling missions for nothing? It was queer to me at the time. But I wasted time in
doubting myself. Why should he send you? Because you smile and dress well? Because you're
twenty-eight."
"Perhaps because I can be trusted. Or aren't you in the market for logical reasons?"
"Or perhaps because you can't be trusted. Which is logical enough, as it turns out."
"Are we matching paradoxes, or is this all a word game to see who can say the least in the
most words?"
And the blaster advanced, with Pritcher after it. He stood erect before the younger man: "Stand
up!"
Channis did so, in no particular hurry, and felt the muzzle of the blaster touch his belt with no
shrinking of the stomach muscles.
Pritcher said: "What the Mule wanted was to find the Second Foundation. He had failed and I
had failed, and the secret that neither of us can find is a well-hidden one. So there was one
outstanding possibility left – and that was to find a seeker who ready knew the hiding-place."
"Is that I?"
"Apparently it was. I didn't know then, of course, but though my mind must be slowing, it still
points in the right direction. How easily we found Star's End! How miraculously you examined
the correct Field Region of the Lens from among an infinite number of possibilties! And having
done so, how nicely we observe just the correct point for observation! You clumsy fool! Did you
so underestimate me that no combination of impossible fortuties struck you as being too much
for me to swallow?"
"You mean I've been too successful?"
"Too successful by half for any loyal man."
"Because the standards of success you set me were so low?"
And the blaster prodded, though in the face that confront Channis only the cold glitter of the
eyes betrayed the growing anger: "Because you are in the pay of the Second Foundation."
"Pay?"– infinite contempt. "Prove that."
"Or under the mental influence."
"Without the Mule's knowledge? Ridiculous."
"With the Mule's knowledge. Exactly my point, my you dullard. With the Mule's knowledge. Do
you suppose else that you would be given a ship to play with? You led us to the Second
Foundation as you were supposed to do."
"I thresh a kernel of something or other out of this immensity of chaff. May I ask why I'm
supposed to be doing all this? If were a traitor, why should I lead you to the Second
Foundation? Why not hither and yon through the Galaxy, skipping gaily, finding no more than
you ever did?'
"For the sake of the ship. And because the men of the Second Foundation quite obviously need
atomic warfare for self-defense."
'You'll have to do better than that. One ship won't mean thing to them, and if they think they'll
learn science from it a build atomic power plants next year, they are very, very simple Second
Foundationers, indeed. On the order of simplicity as yourself, I should say."
"You will have the opportunity to explain that to the Mule."
"We're going back to Kalgan?"
"On the contrary. We're staying here. And the Mule will join us in fifteen minutes – more or less.
Do you think he hasn't followed us, my sharp-witted, nimble-minded lump of self-admiration?
You have played the decoy well in reverse. You may not have led our victims to us, but you
have certainly led us to our victims."
"May I sit down," said Channis, "and explain something to you in picture drawings? Please."
"You will remain standing."
At that, I can say it as well standing. You think the Mule followed us because of the hypertracer
on the communication circuit?"
The blaster might have wavered. Channis wouldn't have sworn to it. He said: "You don't look
surprised. But I don't waste time doubting that you feel surprised. Yes, I knew about it. And
now, having shown you that I knew of something you didn't think I did, I'll tell you something
you don't know, that I know you don't."
"You allow yourself too many preliminaries, Channis. I should think your sense of invention was
more smoothly greased.
"There's on invention to this. There have been traitors, of course, or enemy agents, if you prefer
that term. But the Mule knew of that in a rather curious way. It seems, you see, that some of his
Converted men had been tampered with."
The blaster did waver that time. Unmistakably.
"I emphasize that, Pritcher. It was why he needed me. I was an Unconverted man. Didn't he
emphasize to you that he needed an Unconverted? Whether he gave you the real reason or
not?"
"Try something else, Channis. If I were against the Mule, I'd know it." Quietly, rapidly, Pritcher
was feeling his mind. It felt the same. It felt the same. Obviously the man was lying.
"You mean you feel loyal to the Mule. Perhaps. Loyalty wasn't tampered with. Too easily
detectable, the Mule said. But how do you feel mentally? Sluggish? Since you started this trip,
have you always felt normal? Or have you felt strange sometimes, as though you weren't quite
yourself? What are you trying to do, bore a hole through me without touching the trigger?"
Pritcher withdrew his blaster half an inch, "What are you trying to say?"
"I say that you've been tampered with. You've been handled. You didn't see the Mule install that
hypertracer. You didn't see anyone do it. You just found it there, and assumed it was the Mule,
and ever since you've been assuming he was following us. Sure, the wrist receiver you're
wearing contacts the ship on a wave length mine isn't good for. Do you think I didn't know
that?" He was speaking quickly now, angrily. His cloak of indifference had dissolved into
savagery. "But it's not the Mule that's coming toward us from out there. It's not the Mule."
"Who, if not?"
"Well, who do you suppose? I found that hypertracer, the day we left. But I didn't think it was
the Mule. He had no reason for indirection at that point. Don't you see the nonsense of it? If I
were a traitor and he knew that, I could be Converted as easily as you were, and he would
have the secret of the location of the Second Foundation out of my mind without sending me
half across the Galaxy. Can you keep a secret from the Mule? And if I didn't know, then I
couldn't lead him to it. So why send me in either case?
"Obviously, that hypertracer must have been put there by an agent of the Second Foundation.
That's who's coming towards us now. And would you have been fooled if your precious mind
hadn't been tampered with? What kind of normality have you that you imagine immense folly to
be wisdom? Me bring a ship to the Second Foundation? What would they do with a ship?
"It's you they want, Pritcher. You know more about the Union than anyone but the Mule, and
you're not dangerous to them while he is. That’s why they put the direction of search into my
mind. Of course, it was completely impossible for me to find Tazenda by random searchings of
the Lens. I knew that. But I knew there was the Second Foundation after us, and I knew they
engineered it. Why not play their game? It was a battle of bluffs. They wanted us and I wanted
their location – and space take the one that couldn't outbluff the other.
"But it's we that will lose as long as you hold that blaster on me. And it obviously isn't your idea.
It's theirs. Give me the blaster, Pritcher. I know it seems wrong to you, but it isn't your mind
speaking, it's the Second Foundation within you. Give me the blaster, Pritcher, and we’ll face
what's coming now, together."
Pritcher, faced a growing confusion in horror. Plausibility! Could he be so wrong? Why this
eternal doubt of himself? Why wasn't he sure? What made Channis sound so plausible?
Plausibility!
Or was it his own tortured mind fighting the invasion of the alien.
Was he split in two?
Hazily, he saw Channis standing before him, hand outstretched – and suddenly, he knew he
was going to give him the blaster.
And as the muscles of his arm were on the point of contracting in the proper manner to do so,
the door opened, not hastily, behind him – and he turned.
There are perhaps men in the Galaxy who can be confused for one another even by men at
their peaceful leisure. Correspondingly, there may be conditions of mind when even unlikely
pairs may be mis-recognized. But the Mule rises above any combination of the two factors.
Not all Pritcher's agony of mind prevented the instantaneous mental flood of cool vigor that
engulfed him.
Physically, the Mule could not dominate any situation. Nor did he dominate this one.
He was rather a ridiculous figure in his layers of clothing that thickened him past his normality
without allowing him to reach normal dimensions even so. His face was muffled and the usually
dominant beak covered what was left in a cold-red prominence.
Probably as a vision of rescue, no greater incongruity could exist.
He said: "Keep your blaster, Pritcher."
Then he turned to Channis, who had shrugged and seated himself: "The emotional context
here seems rather confusing and considerably in conflict. What's this about someone other
than myself following you?"
Pritcher intervened sharply: "Was a hypertracer placed upon our ship by your orders, sir?"
The Mule turned cool eyes upon him, "Certainly. Is it very likely that any organization in the
Galaxy other than the Union of Worlds would have access to it?'
"He said–"
"Well, he's here, general. Indirect quotation is not necessary. Have you been saying anything,
Channis?"
"Yes. But mistakes apparently, sir. It has been my opinion that the tracer was put there by
someone in the pay of the Second Foundation and that we had been led here for some
purpose of theirs, which I was prepared to counter. I was under the further impression that the
general was more or less in their hands."
"You sound as if you think so no longer."
"I'm afraid not. Or it would not have been you at the door."
"Well, then, let us thresh this out." The Mule peeled off the outer layers of padded, and
electrically heated clothing. "Do you mind if I sit down as well? Now – we are safe here and
perfectly free of any danger of intrusion. No native of this lump of ice will have any desire to
approach this place. I assure you of that," and there was a grim earnestness about his
insistence upon his powers.
Channis showed his disgust. "Why privacy? Is someone going to serve tea and bring out the
dancing girls?"
"Scarcely. What was this theory of yours, young man? A Second Foundationer was tracing you
with a device which no one but I have and – how did you say you found this place?"
"Apparently, sir, it seems obvious, in order to account for known facts, that certain notions have
been put into my head–"
"By these same Second Foundationers?"
"No one else, I imagine."
"Then it did not occur to you that if a Second Foundationer could force, or entice, or inveigle
you into going to the Second Foundation for purposes of his own – and I assume you imagined
he used methods similar to mine, though, mind you, I can implant only emotions, not ideas – it
did not occur to you that if he could do that there was little necessity to put a hypertracer on
you.
And Channis looked up sharply and met his sovereign's large eyes with sudden startle. Pritcher
grunted and a visible relaxation showed itself in his shoulders.
"No," said Channis, "that hadn't occurred to me."
"Or that if they were obliged to trace you, they couldn't feel capable of directing you, and that,
undirected, you could have precious little chance of finding your way here as you did. Did that
occur to you?"
"That, neither."
"Why not? Has your intellectual level receded to a so-much-greater-than-probable degree?"
"The only answer is a question, sir. Are you joining General Pritcher in accusing me of being a
traitor?"
"You have a defense in case I am?"
"Only the one I presented to the general. If I were a traitor and knew the whereabouts of the
Second Foundation, you could Convert me and learn the knowledge directly. If you felt it
necessary to trace me, then I hadn't the knowledge beforehand and wasn't a traitor. So I
answer your paradox with another."
"Then your conclusion?"
"That I am not a traitor."
"To which I must agree, since your argument is irrefutable."
"Then may I ask you why you had us secretly followed?"
"Because to all the facts there is a third explanation. Both you and Pritcher explained some
facts in your own individual ways, but not all. I – if you can spare me the time – will explain all.
And in a rather short time, so there is little danger of boredom. Sit down, Pritcher, and give me
your blaster. There is no danger of attack on us any longer. None from in here and none from
out there. None in fact even from the Second Foundation. Thanks to you, Channis."
The room was lit in the usual Rossemian fashion of electrically heated wire. A single bulb was
suspended from the ceiling and in its dim yellow glow, the three cast their individual shadows.
The Mule said: "Since I felt it necessary to trace Channis, it was obvious I expect to gain
something thereby. Since he went to the Second Foundation with a startling speed and
directness, we can reasonably assume that that was what I was expecting to happen. Since I
did not gain the knowledge from him directly, something must have been preventing me. Those
are the facts. Channis, of course, knows the answer. So do I. Do you see it, Pritcher?"
And Pritcher said doggedly: "No, sir."
"Then I’ll explain. Only one kind of man can both know the location of the Second Foundation
and prevent me from learning it. Channis, I'm afraid you're a Second Foundationer yourself."
And Channis' elbows rested on his knees as he leaned forward, and through stiff and angry lips
said: "What is your direct evidence? Deduction has proven wrong twice today."
"There is direct evidence, too, Channis. It was easy enough. I told you that my men had been
tampered with. The tamperer must have been, obviously, someone who was a) Unconverted,
and b) fairly close to the center of things. The field was large but not entirely unlimited. You
were too successful, Channis. People liked you too much. You got along too well. I wondered–
"And then I summoned you to take over this expedition and it didn't set you back. I watched
your emotions. It didn't bother you. You overplayed the confidence there, Channis. No man of
real competence could have avoided a dash of uncertainty at a job like that. Since your mind
did avoid it, it was either a foolish one or a controlled one.
It was easy to test the alternatives. I seized your mind at a moment of relaxation and filled it
with grief for an instant and then removed it. You were angry afterwards with such
accomplished art that I could have sworn it was a natural reaction, but for that which went first.
For when I wrenched at your emotions, for just one instant, for one tiny instant before you could
catch yourself, your mind resisted. It was all I needed to know.
"No one could have resisted me, even for that tiny instant, without control similar to mine."
Channis' voice was low and bitter: "Well, then? Now what?"
"And now you die – as a Second Foundationer. Quite necessary, as I believe you realize."
And once again Channis stared into the muzzle of a blaster. A muzzle guided this time by a
mind, not like Pritcher's capable of offhand twisting to suit himself, but by one as mature as his
own and as resistant to force as his own.
And the period of time allotted him for a correction of events was small.
What followed thereafter is difficult to describe by one with the normal complement of senses
and the normal incapacity for emotional control.
Essentially, this is what Channis realized in the tiny space of time involved in the pushing of the
Mule's thumb upon the trigger contact.
The Mule's current emotional makeup was one of a hard and polished determination, unmisted
by hesitation in the least. Had Channis been sufficiently interested afterward to calculate the
time involved from the determination to shoot to the arrival of the disintegrating energies, he
might have realized that his leeway was about one-fifth of a second.
That was barely time.
What the Mule realized in that same tiny space of time was that the emotional potential of
Channis' brain had surged suddenly upwards without his own mind feeling any impact and that,
simultaneously, a flood of pure, thrilling hatred cascaded upon him from an unexpected
direction.
It was that new emotional element that jerked his thumb off the contact. Nothing else could
have done it, and almost together with his change of action, came complete realization of the
new situation.
It was a tableau that endured far less than the significance adhering to it should require from a
dramatic standpoint. There was the Mule, thumb off the blaster, staring intently upon Channis
There was Channis taut, not quite daring to breathe yet. And there was Pritcher, convulsed in
his chair; every muscle at a spasmodic breaking point; every tendon writhing in an effort to hurl
forward; his face twisted at last out of schooled woodenness into an unrecognizable death
mask of horrid hate; and his eyes only and entirely and supremely upon the Mule.
Only a word or two passed between Channis and the Mule – only a word or two and that utterly
revealing stream of emotional consciousness that remains forever the true interplay of
understanding between such as they. For the sake of our own limits, it is necessary to translate
into words what went on, then, and thenceforward.
Channis said, tensely: "You’re between two fires, First Citizen. You can't control two minds
simultaneously, not when one of them is mine – so you have your choice. Pritcher, is free of
your Conversion now. I've snapped the bonds. He's the old Pritcher; the one who tried to kill
you once; the one who thinks you're the enemy of all that is free and right and holy; and he's
the one besides who knows that you've debased him to helpless adulation for five years. I'm
holding him back now by suppressing his will, but if you kill me, that ends, and in considerably
less time than you could shift your blaster or even your will – he will kill you."
The Mule quite plainly realized that. He did not move.
Channis continued: "If you turn to place him under control, to kill him, to do anything, you won't
ever be quick enough to turn again to stop me."
The Mule still did not move. Only a soft sigh of realization.
"So," said Channis, "throw down the blaster, and let us be on even terms again, and you can
have Pritcher back."
"I made a mistake," said the Mule, finally. "It was wrong to have a third party present when I
confronted you. It introduced one variable too many. It is a mistake that must be paid for, I
suppose."
He dropped the blaster carelessly, and kicked it to the other end of the room. Simultaneously,
Pritcher crumpled into profound sleep.
"He’ll be normal when he awakes," said the Mule, indifferently.
The entire exchange from the time the Mule's thumb had begun pressing the trigger-contact to
the time he dropped the blaster had occupied just under a second and a half of time.
But just beneath the borders of consciousness, for a time just above the borders of detection,
Channis caught a fugitive emotional gleam in the Mule's mind. And it was still one of sure and
confident triumph.
6
One Man, the Mule – and Another
Two men, apparently relaxed and entirely at ease, poles apart physically – with every nerve
that served as emotional detector quivering tensely.
The Mule, for the first time in long years, had insufficient surety of his own way. Channis knew
that, though he could protect himself for the moment, it was an effort – and that the attack upon
him was none such for his opponent. In a test of endurance, Channis knew he would lose.
But it was deadly to think of that. To give away to the Mule an emotional weakness would be to
hand him a weapon. There was already that glimpse of something – a winner's something – in
the Mule's mind.
To gain time–
Why did the others delay? Was that the source of the Mule's confidence? What did his
opponent know that he didn't? The mind he watched told nothing. If only he could read ideas.
And yet–
Channis braked his own mental whirling roughly. There was only that; to gain time–
Channis said: "Since it is decided, and not denied by myself after our little duel over Pritcher,
that I am a Second Foundationer, suppose you tell me why I came to Tazenda."
"Oh, no," and the Mule laughed, with high-pitched confidence, "I am not Pritcher. I need make
no explanations to you. You had what you thought were reasons. Whatever they were, your
actions suited me, and so I inquire no further."
"Yet there must be such gaps in your conception of the story. Is Tazenda the Second
Foundation you expected to find? Pritcher spoke much of your other attempt at finding it, and of
your psychologist tool, Ebling Mis. He babbled a bit sometimes under my ... uh ... slight
encouragement. Think back on Ebling Mis, First Citizen."
"Why should I?" Confidence!
Channis felt that confidence edge out into the open, as if with the passage of time, any anxiety
the Mule might be having was increasingly vanishing.
He said, firmly restraining the rush of desperation: "You lack curiosity, then? Pritcher told me of
Mis' vast surprise at something. There was his terribly drastic urging for speed, for a rapid
warning of the Second Foundation? Why? Why? Ebling Mis died. The Second Foundation was
not warned. And yet the Second Foundation exists."
The Mule smiled in real pleasure, and with a sudden and surprising dash of cruelty that
Channis felt advance and suddenly withdraw: "But apparently the Second Foundation was
warned. Else how and why did one Bail Channis arrive on Kalgan to handle my men and to
assume the rather thankless task of outwitting me. The warning came too late, that is all."
"Then," and Channis allowed pity to drench outward from him, "you don't even know what the
Second Foundation is, or anything of the deeper meaning of all that has been going on."
To gain time!
The Mule felt the other's pity, and his eyes narrowed with instant hostility. He rubbed his nose
in his familiar four-fingered gesture, and snapped: "Amuse yourself, then. What of the Second
Foundation?"
Channis spoke deliberately, in words rather than in emotional symbology. He said: "From what I
have heard, it was the mystery that surrounded the Second Foundation that most puzzled Mis.
Hari Seldon founded his two units so differently. The First Foundation was a splurge that in two
centuries dazzled half the Galaxy. And the Second was an abyss that was dark.
"You won't understand why that was, unless you can once again feel the intellectual
atmosphere of the days of the dying Empire. It was a time of absolutes, of the great final
generalities, at least in thought. It was a sign of decaying culture, of course, that dams had
been built against the further development of ideas. It was his revolt against these dams that
made Seldon famous. It was that one last spark of youthful creation in him that lit the Empire in
a sunset glow and dimly foreshadowed the rising sun of the Second Empire."
"Very dramatic. So what?"
"So he created his Foundations according to the laws of psychohistory, but who knew better
than he that even those laws were relative. He never created a finished product. Finished
products are for decadent minds. His was an evolving mechanism and the Second Foundation
was the instrument of that evolution. We, First Citizen of your Temporary Union of Worlds, we
are the guardians of Seldon's Plan. Only we!"
"Are you trying to talk yourself into courage," inquired the Mule, contemptuously, "or are you
trying to impress me? For the Second Foundation, Seldon's Plan, the Second Empire all
impresses me not the least, nor touches any spring of compassion, sympathy, responsibility,
nor any other source of emotional aid you may be trying to tap in me. And in any case, poor
fool, speak of the Second Foundation in the past tense, for it is destroyed."
Channis felt the emotional potential that pressed upon his mind rise in intensity as the Mule
rose from his chair and approached. He fought back furiously, but something crept relentlessly
on within him, battering and bending his mind back – and back.
He felt the wall behind him, and the Mule faced him, skinny arms akimbo, lips smiling terribly
beneath that mountain of nose.
The Mule said: "Your game is through, Channis. The game of all of you-of all the men of what
used to be the Second Foundation. Used to be! Used to be!
"What were you sitting here waiting for all this time, with your babble to Pritcher, when you
might have struck him down and taken the blaster from him without the least effort of physical
force? You were waiting for me, weren't you, waiting to greet me in a situation that would not
too arouse my suspicions.
"Too bad for you that I needed no arousal. I knew you. I knew you well, Channis of the Second
Foundation.
"But what are you waiting for now? You still throw words at me desperately, as though the mere
sound of your voice would freeze me to my seat. And all the while you speak, something in
your mind is waiting and waiting and is still waiting. But no one is coming. None of those you
expect – none of your allies. You are alone here, Channis, and you will remain alone. Do you
know why?
"It is because your Second Foundation miscalculated me to the very dregs of the end. I knew
their plan early. They thought I would follow you here and be proper meat for their cooking. You
were to be a decoy indeed – a decoy for a poor, foolish weakling mutant, so hot on the trail of
Empire that he would fall blindly into an obvious pit. But am I their prisoner?
"I wonder if it occurred to them that I’d scarcely be here without my fleet – against the artillery of
any unit of which they are entirely and pitifully helpless? Did it occur to them that I would not
pause for discussion or wait for events?
"My ships were launched against Tazenda twelve hours ago and they are quite, quite through
with their mission. Tazenda is laid in ruins; its centers of population are wiped out. There was
no resistance. The Second Foundation no longer exists, Channis – and I, the queer, ugly
weakling, am the ruler of the Galaxy."
Channis could do nothing but shake his head feebly. "No– No–"
"Yes– Yes–" mimicked the Mule. "And if you are the last one alive, and you may be, that will not
be for long either."
And then there followed a short, pregnant pause, and Channis almost howled with the sudden
pain of that tearing penetration of the innermost tissues of his mind.
The Mule drew back and muttered: "Not enough. You do not pass the test after all. Your
despair is pretense. Your fear is not the broad overwhelming that adheres to the destruction of
an ideal, but the puny seeping fear of personal destruction."
And the Mule’s weak hand seized Channis by the throat in a puny grip that Channis was
somehow unable to break.
"You are my insurance, Channis. You are my director and safeguard against any
underestimation I may make." The Mule's eyes bore down upon him. Insistent– Demanding–
"Have I calculated rightly, Channis? Have I outwitted your men of the Second Foundation?
Tazenda is destroyed, Channis, tremendously destroyed; so why is your despair pretense?
Where is the reality? I must have reality and truth! Talk, Channis talk. Have I penetrated then,
not deeply enough? Does the danger still exist? Talk, Channis. Where have I done wrong?"
Channis felt the words drag out of his mouth. They did not come willingly. He clenched his teeth
against them. He bit his tongue. He tensed every muscle of his throat.
And they came out – gasping – pulled out by force and tearing his throat and tongue and teeth
on the way.
"Truth," he squeaked, "truth–"
"Yes, truth. What is left to be done?"
"Seldon founded Second Foundation here. Here, as I said. I told no lie. The psychologists
arrived and took control of the native population."
"Of Tazenda?" The Mule plunged deeply into the flooding torture of the other's emotional
upwellings – tearing at them brutally. "It is Tazenda I have destroyed. You know what I want.
Give it to me."
"Not Tazenda. I said Second Foundationers might not be those apparently in power; Tazenda
is the figurehead–" The words were almost unrecognizable, forming themselves against every
atom of will of the Second Foundationer, "Rossem– Rossem– Rossem is the world–"
The Mule loosed his grip and Channis dropped into a huddle of pain and torture.
"And you thought to fool me?" said the Mule, softly.
"You were fooled." It was the last dying shred of resistance in Channis.
"But not long enough for you and yours. I am in communication with my Fleet. And after
Tazenda can come Rossem. But first–"
Channis felt the excruciating darkness rise against him, and the automatic lift of his arm to his
tortured eyes could not ward it off. It was a darkness that throttled, and as he felt his tom,
wounded mind reeling backwards, backwards into the everlasting black – there was that final
picture of the triumphant Mule – laughing matchstick – that long, fleshy nose quivering with
laughter.
The sound faded away. The darkness embraced him lovingly.
It ended with a cracking sensation that was like the jagged glare of a lightning flash, and
Channis came slowly to earth while sight returned painfully in blurry transmission through
tear-drenched eyes.
His head ached unbearably, and it was only with a stab of agony that he could bring up a hand
to it.
Obviously, he was alive. Softly, like feathers caught up in an eddy of air that had passed, his
thoughts steadied and drifted to rest. He felt comfort suck in – from outside. Slowly, torturedly,
he bent his neck – and relief was a sharp pang.
For the door was open; and the First Speaker stood just inside the threshold. He tried to speak,
to shout, to warn – but his tongue froze and he knew that a part of the Mule's mighty mind still
held him and clamped all speech within him.
He bent his neck once more. The Mule was still in the room. He was angry and hot-eyed. He
laughed no longer, but his teeth were bared in a ferocious smile.
Channis felt the First Speaker's mental influence moving gently over his mind with a healing
touch and then there was the numbing sensation as it came into contact with the Mule's
defense for an instant of struggle and withdrew.
The Mule said gratingly, with a fury that was grotesque in his meagre body: "Then another
comes to greet me." His agile mind reached its tendrils out of the room– out– out–
"You are alone," he said.
And the First Speaker interrupted with an acquiescence: "I am thoroughly alone. It is necessary
that I be alone, since it was I who miscalculated your future five years ago. There would be a
certain satisfaction to me in correcting that matter without aid. Unfortunately, I did not count on
the strength of your Field of Emotional Repulsion that surrounded this place. It took me long to
penetrate. I congratulate you upon the skill with which it was constructed."
"Thank you for nothing," came the hostile rejoinder. "Bandy no compliments with me. Have you
come to add your brain splinter to that of yonder cracked pillar of your realm?"
The First Speaker smiled: "Why, the man you call Bail Channis performed his mission well, the
more so since he was not your mental equal by far. I can see, of course, that you have
mistreated him, yet it may be that we may restore him fully even yet. He is a brave man, sir. He
volunteered for this mission although we were able to predict mathematically the huge chance
of damage to his mind – a more fearful alternative than that of mere physical crippling."
Channis' mind pulsed futilely with what he wanted to say and couldn't; the warning he wished to
shout and was unable to. He could only emit that continuous stream of fear– fear–
The Mule was calm. "You know, of course, of the destruction of Tazenda."
"I do. The assault by your fleet was foreseen."
Grimly: "Yes, so I suppose. But not prevented, eh?"
"No, not prevented." The First Speaker's emotional symbology was plain. It was almost a
self-horror; a complete self-disgust: "And the fault is much more mine than yours. Who could
have imagined your powers five years ago. We suspected from the start – from the moment
you captured Kalgan – that you had the powers of emotional control. That was not too
surprising, First Citizen, as I can explain to you.
"Emotional contact such as you and I possess is not a very new development. Actually it is
implicit in the human brain. Most humans can read emotion in a primitive manner by
associating it pragmatically with facial expression, tone of voice and so on. A good many
animals possess the faculty to a higher degree; they use the sense of smell to a good extent
and the emotions involved are, of course, less complex.
"Actually, humans are capable of much more, but the faculty of direct emotional contact tended
to atrophy with the development of speech a million years back. It has been the great advance
of our Second Foundation that this forgotten sense has been restored to at least some of its
potentialities.
"But we are not born with its full use. A million years of decay is a formidable obstacle, and we
must educate the sense, exercise it as we exercise our muscles. And there you have the main
difference. You were born with it.
"So much we could calculate. We could also calculate the effect of such a sense upon a person
in a world of men who did not possess it. The seeing man in the kingdom of the blind– We
calculated the extent to which a megalomania would take control of you and we thought we
were prepared. But for two factors we were not prepared.
"The first was the great extent of your sense. We can induce emotional contact only when in
eyeshot, which is why we are more helpless against physical weapons than you might think.
Sight plays such an enormous part. Not so with you. You are definitely known to have had men
under control, and, further, to have had intimate emotional contact with them when out of sight
and out of earshot. That was discovered too late.
"Secondly, we did not know of your physical shortcomings, particularly the one that seemed so
important to you, that you adopted the name of the Mule. We didn't foresee that you were not
merely a mutant, but a sterile mutant and the added psychic distortion due to your inferiority
complex passed us by. We allowed only for a megalomania – not for an intensely psychopathic
paranoia as well.
"It is myself that bears the responsibility for having missed all that, for I was the leader of the
Second Foundation when you captured Kalgan. When you destroyed the First Foundation, we
found out – but too late – and for that fault millions have died on Tazenda."
"And you will correct things now?" The Mules thin lips curled, his mind pulsing with hate: "What
will you do? Fatten me? Restore me to a masculine vigor? Take away from my past the long
childhood in an alien environment. Do you regret my sufferings? Do you regret my
unhappiness? I have no sorrow for what I did in my necessity. Let the Galaxy Protect itself as
best it can, since it stirred not a whit for my protection when I needed it."
Your emotions are, of course," said the First Speaker, "only the children of your background
and are not to be condemned – merely changed. The destruction of Tazenda was unavoidable.
The alternative would have been a much greater destruction generally throughout the Galaxy
over a period of centuries. We did our best in our limited way. We withdrew as many men from
Tazenda as we could. We decentralized the rest of the world. Unfortunately, our measures
were of necessity far from adequate. It left many millions to die – do you not regret that?"
"Not at all – any more than I regret the hundred thousand that must die on Rossem in not more
than six hours."
"On Rossem?" said the First Speaker, quickly.
He turned to Channis who had forced himself into a half-sitting posture, and his mind exerted
its force. Channis, felt the duel of minds strain over him, and then there was a short snapping of
the bond and the words came tumbling out of his mouth: "Sir, I have failed completely. He
forced it from me not ten minutes before your arrival. I could not resist him and I offer no
excuses. He knows Tazenda is not the Second Foundation. He knows that Rossem is."
And the bonds closed down upon him again.
The First Speaker frowned: "I see. What is it you are planning to do?"
"Do you really wonder? Do you really find it difficult to penetrate the obvious? All this time that
you have preached to me of the nature of emotional contact – all this time that you have been
throwing words such as megalomania and paranoia at me, I have been working. I have been in
contact with my Fleet and it has its orders. In six hours, unless I should for some reason
counteract my orders, they are to bombard all of Rossem except this lone village and an area
of a hundred square miles about it. They are to do a thorough job and are then to land here.
"You have six hours, and in six hours, you cannot beat down my mind, nor can you save the
rest of Rossem."
The Mule spread his hands and laughed again while the First Speaker seemed to find difficulty
in absorbing this new state of affairs.
He said: "The alternative?"
"Why should there even be an alternative? I can stand to gain no more by any alternative. Is it
the lives of those on Rossem I'm to be chary of? Perhaps if you allow my ships to land and
submit, all of you – all the men on the Second Foundation – to mental control sufficient to suit
myself, I may countermand the bombardment orders. It may be worthwhile to put so many men
of high intelligence under my control. But then again it would be a considerable effort and
perhaps not worth it after all, so I'm not particularly eager to have you agree to it. What do you
say, Second Foundationer? What weapon have you against my mind which is as strong as
yours at least and against my ships which are stronger than anything you have ever dreamed
of possessing?"
"What have I?" repeated the First Speaker, slowly: "Why nothing – except a little grain – such a
little grain of knowledge that even yet you do not possess."
"Speak quickly," laughed the Mule, "speak inventively. For squirm as you might, you won't
squirm out of this."
"Poor mutant," said the First Speaker, "I have nothing to squirm out of. Ask yourself – why was
Bail Channis sent to Kalgan as a decoy – Bail Channis, who though young and brave is almost
as much your mental inferior as is this sleeping officer of yours, this Han Pritcher. Why did not I
go, or another of our leaders, who would be more your match?"
"Perhaps," came the supremely confident reply, "you were not sufficiently foolish, since
perhaps none of you are my match."
"The true reason is more logical. You knew Channis to be a Second Foundationer. He lacked
the capacity to hide that from you. And you knew, too, that you were his superior, so you were
not afraid to play his game and follow him as he wished you to in order to outwit him later. Had I
gone to Kalgan, you would have killed me for I would have been a real danger, or had I avoided
death by concealing my identity, I would yet have failed in persuading you to follow me into
space. It was only known inferiority that lured you on. And had you remained on Kalgan, not all
the force of the Second Foundation could have harmed you, surrounded as you were by your
men, your machines, and your mental power."
"My mental power is yet with me, squirmer," said the Mule, "and my men and machines are not
far off."
"Truly so, but you are not on Kalgan. You are here in the Kingdom of Tazenda, logically
presented to you as the Second Foundation – very logically presented. It had to be so
presented, for you are a wise man, First Citizen, and would follow only logic."
"Correct, and it was a momentary victory for your side, but there was still time for me to worm
the truth from your man, Channis, and still wisdom in me to realize that such a truth might
exist."
"And on our side, oh, not-quite-sufficiently-subtle one, was the realization that you might go that
one step further and so Bail Channis was prepared for you."
"That he most certainly was not, for I stripped his brain clean as any plucked chicken. It
quivered bare and open before me and when he said Rossem was the Second Foundation, it
was basic truth for I had ground him so flat and smooth that not the smidgeon of a deceit could
have found refuge in any microscopic crevice."
"True enough. So much the better for our foresight. For I have told you already that Bail
Channis was a volunteer. Do you know what sort of a volunteer? Before he left our Foundation
for Kalgan and you, he submitted to emotional surgery of a drastic nature. Do you think it was
sufficient to deceive you? Do you think Bail Channis, mentally untouched, could possibly
deceive you? No, Bail Channis was himself deceived, of necessity and voluntarily. Down to the
inmost core of his mind, Bail Channis honestly believes that Rossem is the Second Foundation.
"And for three years now, we of the Second Foundation have built up the appearance of that
here in the Kingdom of Tazenda, in preparation and waiting for you. And we have succeeded,
have we not? You penetrated to Tazenda, and beyond that, to Rossem – but past that, you
could not go."
The Mule was upon his feet: "You dare tell me that Rossem also, is not the Second
Foundation?"
Channis, from the floor, felt his bonds burst for good, under a stream of mental force on the part
of the First Speaker and strained upright. He let out one long, incredulous cry: "You mean
Rossem is not the Second Foundation?"
The memories of life, the knowledge of his mind – everything – whirled mistily about him in
confusion.
The First Speaker smiled: "You see, First Citizen, Channis is as upset as you are. Of course,
Rossem is not the Second Foundation. Are we madmen then, to lead you, our greatest, most
powerful, most dangerous enemy to our own world? Oh, no!
"Let your Fleet bombard Rossem, First Citizen, if you must have it so. Let them destroy all they
can. For at most they can kill only Channis and myself – and that will leave you in a situation
improved not in the least.
"For the Second Foundation's Expedition to Rossem which has been here for three years and
has functioned, temporarily, as Elders in this village, embarked yesterday and are returning to
Kalgan. They will evade your Fleet, of course, and they will arrive in Kalgan at least a day
before you can, which is why I tell you all this. Unless I countermand my orders, when you
return, you will find a revolting Empire, a disintegrated realm, and only the men with you in your
Fleet here will be loyal to you. They will be hopelessly outnumbered. And moreover, the men of
the Second Foundation will be with your Home Fleet and will see to it that you reconvert no
one. Your Empire is done, mutant."
Slowly, the Mule bowed his head, as anger and despair cornered his mind completely, "Yes.
Too late– Too late– Now I see it."
"Now you see it," agreed the First Speaker, "and now you don't."
In the despair of that moment, when the Mule's mind lay open, the First Speaker – ready for
that moment and pre-sure of its nature – entered quickly. It required a rather insignificant
fraction of a second to consummate the change completely.
The Mule looked up and said: "Then I shall return to Kalgan?
"Certainly. How do you feel?"
"Excellently well." His brow puckered: "Who are you?"
"Does it matter?"
"Of course not." He dismissed the matter, and touched Pritcher's shoulder: "Wake up, Pritcher,
we're going home."
It was two hours later that Bail Channis felt strong enough to walk by himself. He said: "He
won't ever remember?"
"Never. He retains his mental powers and his Empire – but his motivations are now entirely
different. The notion of a Second Foundation is a blank to him, and he is a man of peace. He
will be a far happier man henceforward, too, for the few years of life left him by his maladjusted
physique. And then, after he is dead Seldon's Plan will go on – somehow."
"And it is true," urged Channis, "it is true that Rossem is not the Second Foundation? I could
swear – I tell you I know it is. I am not mad."
"You are not mad, Channis, merely, as I have said, changed. Rossem is not the Second
Foundation. Come! We, too, will return home."
LAST INTERLUDE
Bail Channis sat in the small white-tiled room and allowed his mind to relax. He was content to
live in the present. There were the walls and the window and the grass outside. They had no
names. They were just things. There was a bed and a chair an books that developed
themselves idly on the screen at the foot of his bed. There was the nurse who brought him his
food.
At first he had made efforts to piece together the scraps of things he had heard. Such as those
two men talking together.
One had said: "Complete aphasia now. It’s cleaned out, and I think without damage. It will only
be necessary to return the recording of his original brain-wave makeup."
He remembered the sounds by rote, and for some reason they seemed peculiar sounds – as if
they meant something. But why bother.
Better to watch the pretty changing colors on the screen at the foot of the thing he lay on.
And then someone entered and did things to him and for a long time, he slept.
And when that had passed, the bed was suddenly a bed and he knew he was in a hospital, and
the words he remembered made sense.
He sat up: "What's happening?"
The First Speaker was beside him, "You're on the Second Foundation, and you have your mind
back – your original mind."
"Yes! Yes!" Channis came to the realization that he was himself, and there was incredible
triumph and joy in that.
"And now tell me," said the First Speaker, "do you know where the Second Foundation is now?"
And the truth came flooding down in one enormous wave and Channis did not answer. Like
Ebling Mis before him, he was conscious of only one vast, numbing surprise.
Until he finally nodded, and said: "By the Stars of the Galaxy – now, I know."
PART II
SEARCH BY THE FOUNDATION
7
Arcadia
DARELL, ARKADY novelist, born 11, 5, 362 F.E., died 1, 7, 443 F.E. Although primarily a writer
of fiction, Arkady Darell is best known for her biography of her grandmother, Bayta Darell.
Based on first-hand information, it has for centuries served as a primary source of information
concerning the Mule and his times. ... Like "Unkeyed Memories", her novel "Time and Time and
Over" is a stirring reflection of the brilliant Kalganian society of the early Interregnum, based, it
is said, on a visit to Kalgan in her youth....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
Arcadia Darell declaimed firmly into the mouthpiece of her transcriber:
"The Future of Seldon's Plan, by A. Darell" and then thought darkly that some day when she
was a great writer, she would write all her masterpieces under the pseudonym of Arkady. Just
Arkady. No last name at all.
"A. Darell" would be just the sort of thing that she would have to put on all her themes for her
class in Composition and Rhetoric – so tasteless. All the other kids had to do it, too, except for
Olynthus Dam, because the class laughed so when he did it the first time, And "Arcadia" was a
little girls name, wished on her because her great-grandmother had been called that; her
parents just had no imagination at all.
Now that she was two days past fourteen, you'd think they'd recognize the simple fact of
adulthood and call her Arkady. Her lips tightened as she thought of her father looking up from
his book-viewer just long enough to say, "But if you're going to pretend you're nineteen,
Arcadia, what will you do when you're twenty-five and all the boys think you're thirty?"
From where she sprawled across the arms and into the hollow of her own special armchair, she
could see the mirror on her dresser. Her foot was a little in the way because her house slipper
kept twirling about her big toe, so she pulled it in and sat up with an unnatural straightness to
her neck that she felt sure, somehow, lengthened it a full two inches into slim regality.
For a moment, she considered her face thoughtfully – too fat. She opened her jaws half an inch
behind closed lips, and caught the resultant trace of unnatural gauntness at every angle. She
licked her lips with a quick touch of tongue and let them pout a bit in moist softness. Then she
let her eyelids droop in a weary, worldly way– Oh, golly if only her cheeks weren't that silly pink.
She tried putting her fingers to the outer comers of her eye and tilting the lids a bit to get that
mysterious exotic languor of the women of the inner star systems, but her hands were in the
way and she couldn't see her face very well.
Then she lifted her chin, caught herself at a half-profile, and with her eyes a little strained from
looking out the comer and her neck muscles faintly aching, she said, in a voice one octave
below its natural pitch, "Really, father, if you think it makes a particle of difference to me what
some silly old boys think you just–"
And then she remembered that she still had the transmitter open in her hand and said, drearily,
"Oh, golly," and shut it off.
The faintly violet paper with the peach margin line on the left had upon it the following:
"THE FUTURE OF SELDON'S PLAN
"Really, father, if you think it makes a particle of difference to me what some silly old boys think
you just
"Oh, golly."
She pulled the sheet out of the machine with annoyance and another clicked neatly into place.
But her face smoothed out of its vexation, nevertheless, and her wide, little mouth stretched
into a self-satisfied smile. She sniffed at the paper delicately. just right. Just that proper touch of
elegance and charm. And the penmanship was just the last word.
The machine had been delivered two days ago on her first adult birthday. She had said, "But
father, everybody – just everybody in the class who has the slightest pretensions to being
anybody has one. Nobody but some old drips would use hand machines–"
The salesman had said, "There is no other model as compact on the one hand and as
adaptable on the other. It will spell and punctuate correctly according to the sense of the
sentence. Naturally, it is a great aid to education since it encourages the user to employ careful
enunciation and breathing in order to make sure of the correct spelling, to say nothing of
demanding a proper and elegant delivery for correct punctuation."
Even then her father had tried to get one geared for type-print as if she were some dried-up,
old-maid teacher.
But when it was delivered, it was the model she wanted – obtained perhaps with a little more
wail and sniffle than quite went with the adulthood of fourteen – and copy was turned out in a
charming and entirely feminine handwriting, with the most beautifully graceful capitals anyone
ever saw.
Even the phrase, "Oh, golly." somehow breathed glamour when the Transcriber was done with
it.
But just the same she had to get it right, so she sat up straight in her chair, placed her first draft
before her in businesslike fashion, and began again, crisply and clearly; her abdomen flat, her
chest lifted, and her breathing carefully controlled. She intoned, with dramatic fervor:
The Future of Seldon's Plan.
"The Foundation's past history is, I am sure, well-known to all of us who have had the good
fortune to be educated in our planet's efficient and well-staffed school system.
(There! That would start things off right with Miss Erlking, that mean old hag.)
That past history is largely the past history of the great Plan of Hari Seldon. The two are one.
But the question in the mind of most people today is whether this Plan will continue in all its
great wisdom, or whether it will be foully destroyed, or, perhaps, has been so destroyed
already.
"To understand this, it may be best to pass quickly over some of the highlights of the Plan as it
has been revealed to humanity thus far.
(This part was easy because she had taken Modern History the semester before.)
"In the days, nearly four centuries ago, when the First Galactic Empire was decaying into the
paralysis that preceded final death, one man – the great Hari Seldon – foresaw the
approaching end. Through the science of psychohistory, the intrissacies of whose mathematics
has long since been forgotten,
(She paused in a trifle of doubt. She was sure that "intricacies" was pronounced with soft c's
but the spelling didn't look right. Oh, well, the machine couldn't very well be wrong–)
he and the men who worked with him are able to foretell the course of the great social and
economic currents sweeping the Galaxy at the time. It was possible for them to realize that, left
to itself, the Empire would break up, and that thereafter there would be at least thirty thousand
years of anarchic chaos prior to the establishment of a new Empire.
"It was too late to prevent the great Fall, but it was still possible, at least, to cut short the
intermediate period of chaos. The Plan was, therefore, evolved whereby only a single
millennium would separate the Second Empire from the First. We are completing the fourth
century of that millennium, and many generations of men have lived and died while the Plan
has continued its inexorable workings.
"Hari Seldon established two Foundations at the opposite ends of the Galaxy, in a manner and
under such circumstances as would yield the best mathematical solution for his
psychohistorical problem. In one of these, our Foundation, established here on Terminus, there
was concentrated the physical science of the Empire, and through the possession of that
science, the Foundation was able to withstand the attacks of the barbarous kingdoms which
had broken away and become independent, out at the hinge of the Empire.
"The Foundation, indeed, was able to conquer in its turn these short-lived kingdoms by means
of the leadership of a series of wise and heroic men like Salvor Hardin and Hober Mallow who
were able to interpret the Plan intelligently and to guide our land through its
(She had written "intricacies" here also, but decided not to risk it a second time.)
complications. All our planets still revere their memories although centuries have passed.
"Eventually, the Foundation established a commercial system which controlled a large portion
of the Siwennian and Anacreonian sectors of the Galaxy, and even defeated the remnants of
the old Empire under its last great general, Bel Riose. It seemed that nothing could now stop
the workings of Seldon's plan. Every crisis that Seldon had planned had come at its appropriate
time and had been solved, and with each solution the Foundation had taken another giant
stride toward Second Empire and peace.
"And then,
(Her breath came short at this point, and she hissed the word, between her teeth, but the
Transmitter simply wrote them calmly and gracefully.)
with the last remnants of the dead First Empire gone and with only ineffectual warlords ruling
over the splinters and remnants of the decayed colossus,
(She got that phrase out of a thriller on the video last week, but old Miss Erlking never listened
to anything but symphonies and lectures, so she'd never know.)
there came the Mule.
"This strange man was not allowed for in the Plan. He was a mutant, whose birth could not
have been predicted. He had strange and mysterious power of controlling and manipulating
human emotions and in this manner could bend all men to his will. With breath-taking swiftness,
he became a conqueror and Empire-builder, until, finally, he even defeated the Foundation
itself.
"Yet he never obtained universal dominion, since in his first overpowering lunge he was
stopped by the wisdom and daring of a great woman
(Now there was that old problem again. Father would insist that she never bring up the fact that
she was the grandchild of Bayta Darell. Everyone knew it and Bayta was just about the greatest
woman there ever was and she had stopped the Mule singlehanded.)
in a manner the true story of which is known in its entirety to very few.
(There! If she had to read it to the class, that last could he said in a dark voice, and someone
would be sure to ask what the true story was, and then – well, and then she couldn't help tell
the truth if they asked her, could she? In her mind, she was already wordlessly whizzing
through a hurt and eloquent explanation to a stern and questioning paternal parent.)
"After five years of restricted rule, another change took place, the reasons for which are not
known, and the Mule abandoned all plans for further conquest. His last five years were those of
an enlightened despot.
"It is said by some that the change in the Mule was brought about by the intervention of the
Second Foundation. However, no man has ever discovered the exact location of this other
Foundation, nor knows its exact function, so that theory remains unproven.
"A whole generation has passed since the death of the Mule. What of the future, then, now that
he has come and gone? He interrupted Seldon's Plan and seemed to have burst it to
fragments, yet as soon as he died, the Foundation rose again, like a nova from the dead ashes
of a dying star.
(She had made that up herself.)
Once again, the planet Terminus houses the center of a commercial federation almost as great
and as rich as before the conquest, and even more peaceful and democratic.
"Is this planned? Is Seldon's great dream still alive, and will a Second Galactic Empire yet be
formed six hundred years from now? I, myself, believe so, because
(This was the important part. Miss Erlking always had those large, ugly red-pencil scrawls that
went: 'But this is only descriptive. What are your personal reactions? Think! Express yourself!
Penetrate your own soul!' Penetrate your own soul. A lot she knew about souls, with her lemon
face that never smiled in its life–)
never at any time has the political situation been so favorable. The old Empire is completely
dead and the period of the Mule's rule put an end to the era of warlords that preceded him.
Most of the surrounding portions of the Galaxy are civilized and peaceful.
"Moreover the internal health of the Foundation is better than ever before. The despotic times
of the pre-Conquest hereditary mayors have given way to the democratic elections of early
times. There are no longer dissident worlds of independent Traders; no longer the injustices
and dislocations that accompanied accumulations of great wealth in the hands of a few.
"There is no reason, therefore, to fear failure, unless it is true that the Second Foundation itself
presents a danger. Those who think so have no evidence to back their claim, but merely vague
fears and superstitions. I think that our confidence in ourselves, in our nation, and in Hari
Seldon's great Plan should drive from our hearts and minds all uncertainties and
(Hm-m-m. This was awfully corny, but something like this was expected at the end.)
so I say–"
That is as far as "The Future of Seldon's Plan" got, at that moment, because there was the
gentlest little tap on the window, and when Arcadia shot up to a balance on one arm of the
chair, she found herself confronted by a smiling face beyond the glass, its even symmetry of
feature interestingly accentuated by the short, vertical fine of a finger before its lips.
With the slight pause necessary to assume an attitude of bepuzzlement, Arcadia dismounted
from the armchair, walked to the couch that fronted the wide window that held the apparition
and, kneeling upon it, stared out thoughtfully.
The smile upon the man's face faded quickly. While the fingers of one hand tightened whitely
upon the sill, the other made a quick gesture. Arcadia obeyed calmly, and closed the latch that
moved the lower third of the window smoothly into its socket in the wall, allowing the warm
spring air to interfere with the conditioning within.
"You can't get in," she said, with comfortable smugness. "The windows are all screened, and
keyed only to people who belong here. If you come in, all sorts of alarms will break loose." A
pause, then she added, "You look sort of silly balancing on that ledge underneath the window.
If you're not careful, you'll fall and break your neck and a lot of valuable flowers."
"In that case," said the man at the window, who had been thinking that very thing – with a
slightly different arrangement of adjectives– "will you shut off the screen and let me in?"
"No use in doing that'" said Arcadia. "You're probably thinking of a different house, because I'm
not the kind of girl who lets strange men into their ... her bedroom this time of night." Her eyes,
as she said it, took on a heavy-lidded sultriness – or an unreasonable facsimile thereof.
All traces of humor whatever had disappeared from the young stranger's face. He muttered,
"This is Dr. Darell's house, isn't it?"
"Why should I tell you?"
"Oh, Galaxy– Good-by–"
"If you jump off, young man, I will personally give the alarm." (This was intended as a refined
and sophisticated thrust of irony, since to Arcadia's enlightened eyes, the intruder was an
obviously mature thirty, at least – quite elderly, in fact.)
Quite a pause. Then, tightly, he said, "Well, now, look here, girlie, if you don't want me to stay,
and don't want me to go, what do you want me to do?"
"You can come in, I suppose. Dr. Darell does live here. I’ll shut off the screen now."
Warily, after a searching look, the young man poked his hand through the window, then
hunched himself up and through it. He brushed at his knees with an angry, slapping gesture,
and lifted a reddened face at her.
"You're quite sure that your character and reputation won't suffer when they find me here, are
you?"
"Not as much as yours would, because just as soon as I hear footsteps outside, I'll just shout
and yell and say you forced your way in here."
"Yes?" he replied with heavy courtesy, "And how do you intend to explain the shut-off protective
screen?"
"Poof! That would be easy. There wasn't any there in the first place."
The man's eyes were wide with chagrin. "That was a bluff? How old are you, kid?"
"I consider that a very impertinent question, young man. And I am not accustomed to being
addressed as 'kid.'"
"I don't wonder. You're probably the Mule's grandmother in disguise. Do you mind if I leave now
before you arrange a lynching party with myself as star performer?"
"You had better not leave – because my father's expecting you."
The man's look became a wary one, again. An eyebrow shot up as he said, lightly, "Oh?
Anyone with your father?'
"No."
"Anyone called on him lately?'
"Only tradespeople – and you."
"Anything unusual happen at all?"
"Only you."
"Forget me, will you? No, don't forget me. Tell me, how did you know your father was expecting
me?"
"Oh, that was easy. Last week, he received a Personal Capsule, keyed to him personally, with
a self-oxidizing message, you know. He threw the capsule shell into the Trash Disinto, and
yesterday, he gave Poli – that's our maid, you see – a month's vacation so she could visit her
sister in Terminus City, and this afternoon, he made up the bed in the spare room. So I knew
he expected somebody that I wasn't supposed to know anything about. Usually, he tells me
everything."
"Really! I'm surprised he has to. I should think you'd know everything before he tells you."
'I usually do." Then she laughed. She was beginning to feel very much at ease. The visitor was
elderly, but very distinguished-looking with curly brown hair and very blue eyes. Maybe she
could meet somebody like that again, sometimes, when she was old herself.
"And just how," he asked, "did you know it was I he expected."
"Well, who else could it be? He was expecting somebody in so secrety a way, if you know what
I mean – and then you come gumping around trying to sneak through windows, instead of
walking through the front door, the way you would if you had any sense." She remembered a
favorite line, and used it promptly. "Men are so stupid!"
"Pretty stuck on yourself, aren't you, kid? I mean, Miss. You could be wrong, you know. What if
I told you that all this is a mystery to me and that as far as I know, your father is expecting
someone else, not me."
"Oh, I don't think so. I didn't ask you to come in, until after I saw you drop your briefcase."
"My what?"
"Your briefcase, young man. I'm not blind. You didn't drop it by accident, because you looked
down first, so as to make sure it would land right. Then you must have realized it would land
just under the hedges and wouldn't be seen, so you dropped it and didn't look down afterwards.
Now since you came to the window instead of the front door, it must mean that you were a little
afraid to trust yourself in the house before investigating the place. And after you had a little
trouble with me, you took care of your briefcase before taking care of yourself, which means
that you consider whatever your briefcase has in it to be more valuable than your own safety,
and that means that as long as you're in here and the briefcase is out there and we know that
it's out there, you're probably pretty helpless."
She paused for a much-needed breath, and the man said, grittily, "Except that I think I'll choke
you just about medium dead and get out of here, with the briefcase."
"Except, young man, that I happen to have a baseball bat under my bed, which I can reach in
two seconds from where I'm sitting, and I'm very strong for a girl."
Impasse. Finally, with a strained courtesy, the "young man" said, "Shall I introduce myself,
since we're being so chummy. I'm Pelleas Anthor. And your name?"
"I'm Arca– Arkady Darell. Pleased to meet you."
"And now Arkady, would you be a good little girl and call your father?"
Arcadia bridled. "I'm not a little girl. I think you're very rude – especially when you're asking a
favor."
Pelleas Anthor sighed. "Very well. Would you be a good, kind, dear, little old lady, just chock full
of lavender, and call your father?"
"That's not what I meant either, but I’ll call him. Only not so I'll take my eyes off you, young
man." And she stamped on the floor.
There came the sound of hurrying footsteps in the hall, and the door was flung open.
"Arcadia–" There was a tiny explosion of exhaled air, and Dr. Darell said, "Who are you, sir?"
Pelleas sprang to his feet in what was quite obviously relief. "Dr. Toran Darell? I am Pelleas
Anthor. You've received word about me, I think. At least, your daughter says you have."
"My daughter says I have?" He bent a frowning glance at her which caromed harmlessly off the
wide-eyed and impenetrable web of innocence with which she met the accusation.
Dr. Darell said, finally: "I have been expecting you. Would you mind coming down with me,
please?" And he stopped as his eye caught a flicker of motion, which Arcadia caught
simultaneously.
She scrambled toward her Transcriber, but it was quite useless, since her father was standing
right next to it. He said, sweetly, "You've left it going all this time, Arcadia."
"Father," she squeaked, in real anguish, "it is very ungentlemanly to read another person's
private correspondence, especially when it's talking correspondence."
"Ah," said her father, "but 'talking correspondence' with a strange man in your bedroom! As a
father, Arcadia, I must protect you against evil."
"Oh, golly – it was nothing like that."
Pelleas laughed suddenly, "Oh, but it was, Dr. Darell. The young lady was going to accuse me
of all sorts of things, and I must insist that you read it, if only to clear my name."
"Oh–" Arcadia held back her tears with an effort. Her own father didn't even trust her. And that
darned Transcriber– If that silly fool hadn't come gooping at the window, and making her forget
to turn it off. And now her father would be making long, gentle speeches about what young
ladies aren't supposed to do. There just wasn't anything they were supposed to do, it looked
like, except choke and die, maybe.
"Arcadia," said her father, gently, "it strikes me that a young lady–"
She knew it. She knew it.
"–should not be quite so impertinent to men older than she is.
"Well, what did he want to come peeping around my window for? A young lady has a right to
privacy– Now I'll have to do my whole darned composition over."
"It's not up to you to question his propriety in coming to your window. You should simply not
have let him in. You should have called me instantly – especially if you thought I was expecting
him."
She said, peevishly, "It's just as well if you didn't see him – stupid thing. Hell give the whole
thing away if he keeps on going to windows, instead of doors."
"Arcadia, nobody wants your opinion on matters you know nothing of."
"I do, too. It's the Second Foundation, that's what it is."
There was a silence. Even Arcadia felt a little nervous stirring in her abdomen.
Dr. Darell said, softly, "Where have you heard this?"
"Nowheres, but what else is there to be so secret about? And you don't have to worry that I’ll
tell anyone."
"Mr. Anthor," said Dr. Darell, "I must apologize for all this."
"Oh, that's all right," came Anthor's rather hollow response. "It's not your fault if she's sold
herself to the forces of darkness. But do you mind if I ask her a question before we go. Miss
Arcadia–"
"What do you want?"
"Why do you think it is stupid to go to windows instead of to doors?"
"Because you advertise what you're trying to hide, silly. If I have a secret, I don't put tape over
my mouth and let everyone know I have a secret. I talk just as much as usual, only about
something else. Didn't you ever read any of the sayings of Salvor Hardin? He was our first
Mayor, you know."
"Yes, I know."
"Well, he used to say that only a he that wasn't ashamed of itself could possibly succeed. He
also said that nothing had to be true, but everything had to sound true. Well, when you come in
through a window, it's a lie that's ashamed of itself and it doesn't sound true."
"Then what would you have done?"
"If I had wanted to see my father on top secret business, I would have made his acquaintance
openly and seen him about all sorts of strictly legitimate things. And then when everyone knew
all about you and connected you with my father as a matter of course, you could be as top
secret as you want and nobody would ever think of questioning it."
Anthor looked at the girl strangely, then at Dr. Darell. He said, "Let's go. I have a briefcase I
want to pick up in the garden. Wait! Just one last question. Arcadia, you don't really have a
baseball bat under your bed, do you?"
"No! I don't."
"Hah. I didn't think so."
Dr. Darell stopped at the door. "Arcadia," he said, "when you rewrite your composition on the
Seldon Plan, don't be unnecessarily mysterious about your grandmother. There is no necessity
to mention that part at all."
He and Pelleas descended the stairs in silence. Then the visitor asked in a strained voice, "Do
you mind, sir? How old is she?"
"Fourteen, day before yesterday."
"Fourteen? Great Galaxy– Tell me, has she ever said she expects to marry some day?"
"No, she hasn't. Not to me."
Well, if she ever does, shoot him. The one she's going to marry, I mean." He stared earnestly
into the older man's eyes. "I'm serious. Life could hold no greater horror than living with what
shell be like when she's twenty. I don't mean to offend you, of course."
"You don't offend me. I think I know what you mean."
Upstairs, the object of their tender analyses faced the Transcriber with revolted weariness and
said, dully: "Thefutureofseldonsplan." The Transcriber with infinite aplomb, translated that into
elegantly, complicated script capitals as:
"The Future of Seldon's Plan."
8
Seldon's Plan
MATHEMATICS The synthesis of the calculus of n-variables and of n-dimensional geometry is
the basis of what Seldon once called "my little algebra of humanity"....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
Consider a room!
The location of the room is not in question at the moment. It is merely sufficient to say that in
that room, more than anywhere, the Second Foundation existed.
It was a room which, through the centuries, had been the abode of pure science – yet it had
none of the gadgets with which, through millennia of association, science has come to be
considered equivalent. It was a science, instead, which dealt with mathematical concepts only,
in a manner similar to the speculation of ancient, ancient races in the primitive, prehistoric days
before technology had come to be; before Man had spread beyond a single, now-unknown
world.
For one thing, there was in that room – protected by a mental science as yet unassailable by
the combined physical might of the rest of the Galaxy – the Prime Radiant, which held in its
vitals the Seldon Plan – complete.
For another, there was a man, too, in that room – The First Speaker.
He was the twelfth in the line of chief guardians of the Plan, and his title bore no deeper
significance than the fact that at the gatherings of the leaders of the Second Foundation, he
spoke first.
His predecessor had beaten the Mule, but the wreckage of that gigantic struggle still littered the
path of the Plan– For twenty-five years, he, and his administration, had been trying to force a
Galaxy of stubborn and stupid human beings back to the path– It was a terrible task.
The First Speaker looked up at the opening door. Even while, in the loneliness of the room, he
considered his quarter century of effort, which now so slowly and inevitably approached its
climax; even while he had been so engaged, his mind had been considering the newcomer with
a gentle expectation. A youth, a student, one of those who might take over, eventually.
The young man stood uncertainly at the door, so that the First Speaker had to walk to him and
lead him in, with a friendly hand upon the shoulder.
The Student smiled shyly, and the First Speaker responded by saying, "First, I must tell you
why you are here."
They faced each other now, across the desk. Neither was speaking in any way that could be
recognized as such by any man in the Galaxy who was not himself a member of the Second
Foundation.
Speech, originally, was the device whereby Man learned, imperfectly, to transmit the thoughts
and emotions of his mind. By setting up arbitrary sounds and combinations of sounds to
represent certain mental nuances, be developed a method of communication – but one which
in its clumsiness and thick-thumbed inadequacy degenerated all the delicacy of the mind into
gross and guttural signaling.
Down– down– the results can be followed; and all the suffering that humanity ever knew can be
traced to the one fact that no man in the history of the Galaxy, until Hari Seldon, and very few
men thereafter, could really understand one another. Every human being lived behind an
impenetrable wall of choking mist within which no other but he existed. Occasionally there were
the dim signals from deep within the cavern in which another man was located-so that each
might grope toward the other. Yet because they did not know one another, and could not
understand one another, and dared not trust one another, and felt from infancy the terrors and
insecurity of that ultimate isolation – there was the hunted fear of man for man, the savage
rapacity of man toward man.
Feet, for tens of thousands of years, had clogged and shuffled in the mud – and held down the
minds which, for an equal time, had been fit for the companionship of the stars.
Grimly, Man had instinctively sought to circumvent the prison bars of ordinary speech.
Semantics, symbolic logic, psychoanalysis – they had all been devices whereby speech could
either be refined or by-passed.
Psychohistory had been the development of mental science, the final mathematicization
thereof, rather, which had finally succeeded. Through the development of the mathematics
necessary to understand the facts of neural physiology and the electrochemistry of the nervous
system, which themselves had to be, had to be, traced down to nuclear forces, it first became
possible to truly develop psychology. And through the generalization of psychological
knowledge from the individual to the group, sociology was also mathematicized.
The larger groups; the billions that occupied planets; the trillions that occupied Sectors; the
quadrillions that occupied the whole Galaxy, became, not simply human beings, but gigantic
forces amenable to statistical treatment – so that to Hari Seldon, the future became clear and
inevitable, and the Plan could be set up.
The same basic developments of mental science that had brought about the development of
the Seldon Plan, thus made it also unnecessary for the First Speaker to use words in
addressing the Student.
Every reaction to a stimulus, however slight, was completely indicative of all the trifling
changes, of all the flickering currents that went on in another's mind. The First Speaker could
not sense the emotional content of the Student's instinctively, as the Mule would have been
able to do – since the Mule was a mutant with powers not ever likely to become completely
comprehensible to any ordinary man, even a Second Foundationer – rather he deduced them,
as the result of intensive training.
Since, however, it is inherently impossible in a society based on speech to indicate truly the
method of communication of Second Foundationers among themselves, the whole matter will
be hereafter ignored. The First Speaker will be represented as speaking in ordinary fashion,
and if the translation is not always entirely valid, it is at least the best that can be done under
the circumstances.
It will be pretended therefore, that the First Speaker did actually say, "First, I must tell you why
you are here," instead of smiling just so and lifting a finger exactly thus.
The First Speaker said, "You have studied mental science hard and well for most of your life.
You have absorbed all your teachers could give you. It is time for you and a few others like
yourself to begin your apprenticeship for Speakerhood."
Agitation from the other side of the desk.
"No – now you must take this phlegmatically. You had hoped you would qualify. You had feared
you would not. Actually, both hope and fear are weaknesses. You knew you would qualify and
you hesitate to admit the fact because such knowledge might stamp you as cocksure and
therefore unfit. Nonsense! The most hopelessly stupid man is he who is not aware that he is
wise. It is part of your qualification that you knew you would qualify."
Relaxation on the other side of the desk.
"Exactly. Now you feel better and your guard is down. You are fitter to concentrate and fitter to
understand. Remember, to be truly effective, it is not necessary to hold the mind under a tight,
controlling barrier which to the intelligent probe is as informative as a naked mentality. Rather,
one should cultivate an innocence, an awareness of self, and an unself-consciousness of self
which leaves one nothing to hide. My mind is open to you. Let this be so for both of us."
He went on. "It is not an easy thing to be a Speaker. It is not an easy thing to be a
Psychohistorian in the first place; and not even the best Psychohistorian need necessarily
qualify to be a Speaker. There is a distinction here. A Speaker must not only be aware of the
mathematical intricacies of the Seldon Plan; he must have a sympathy for it and for its ends. He
must love the Plan; to him it must be life and breath. More than that it must even be as a living
friend.
"Do you know what this is?"
The First Speaker's hand hovered gently over the black, shining cube in the middle of the desk.
It was featureless.
"No, Speaker, I do not."
"You have heard of the Prime Radiant?"
"This?" –Astonishment.
"You expected something more noble and awe-inspiring? Well, that is natural. It was created in
the days of the Empire, by men of Seldon's time. For nearly four hundred years, it has served
our needs perfectly, without requiring repairs or adjustment. And fortunately so, since none of
the Second Foundation is qualified to handle it in any technical fashion." He smiled gently.
"Those of the First Foundation might be able to duplicate this, but they must never know, of
course."
He depressed a lever on his side of the desk and the room was in darkness. But only for a
moment, since with a gradually livening flush, the two long walls of the room glowed to life.
First, a pearly white, unrelieved, then a trace of faint darkness here and there, and finally, the
fine neatly printed equations in black, with an occasional red hairline that wavered through the
darker forest like a staggering rillet.
"Come, my boy, step here before the wall. You will not cast a shadow. This light does not
radiate from the Radiant in an ordinary manner. To tell you the truth, I do not know even faintly
by what medium this effect is produced, but you will not cast a shadow. I know that."
They stood together in the light. Each wall was thirty feet long, and ten high. The writing was
small and covered every inch.
"This is not the whole Plan," said the First Speaker. "To get it all upon both walls, the individual
equations would have to be reduced to microscopic size – but that is not necessary. What you
now see represents the main portions of the Plan till now. You have learned about this, have
you not?"
"Yes, Speaker, I have."
"Do you recognize any portion."
A slow silence. The student pointed a finger and as he did so, the line of equations marched
down the wall, until the single series of functions he had thought of – one could scarcely
consider the quick, generalized gesture of the finger to have been sufficiently precise – was at
eye-level.
The First Speaker laughed softly, "You will find the Prime Radiant to be attuned to your mind.
You may expect more surprises from the little gadget. What were you about to say about the
equation you have chosen?"
"It," faltered the Student, "is a Rigellian integral, using a planetary distribution of a bias
indicating the presence of two chief economic classes on the planet, or maybe a Sector, plus
an unstable emotional pattern."
"And what does it signify?"
"It represents the limit of tension, since we have here" – he pointed, and again the equations
veered – "a converging series."
"Good," said the First Speaker. "And tell me, what do you think of all this. A finished work of art,
is it not?"
"Definitely!"
"Wrong! It is not." This, with sharpness. "It is the first lesson you must unlearn. The Seldon Plan
is neither complete nor correct. Instead, it is merely the best that could be done at the time.
Over a dozen generations of men have pored over these equations, worked at them, taken
them apart to the last decimal place, and put them together again. They've done more than
that. They've watched nearly four hundred years pass and against the predictions and
equations, they've checked reality, and they have learned.
"They have learned more than Seldon ever knew, and if with the accumulated knowledge of the
centuries we could repeat Seldon's work, we could do a better job. Is that perfectly clear to
you?"
The Student appeared a little shocked.
"Before you obtain your Speakerhood," continued the First Speaker, "you yourself will have to
make an original contribution to the Plan. It is not such great blasphemy. Every red mark you
see on the wall is the contribution of a man among us who lived since Seldon. Why ... why–" He
looked upward, "There!"
The whole wall seemed to whirl down upon him.
"This," he said, "is mine." A fine red line encircled two forking arrows and included six square
feet of deductions along each path. Between the two were a series of equations in red.
"It does not," said the Speaker, "seem to be much. It is at a point in the Plan which we will not
reach yet for a time as long as that which has already passed. It is at the period of
coalescence, when the Second Empire that is to be is in the grip of rival personalities who will
threaten to pull it apart if the fight is too even, or clamp it into rigidity, if the fight is too uneven.
Both possibilities are considered here, followed, and the method of avoiding either indicated.
"Yet it is all a matter of probabilities and a third course can exist. It is one of comparatively low
likelihood – twelve point six four percent, to be exact – but even smaller chances have already
come to pass and the Plan is only forty percent complete. This third probability consists of a
possible compromise between two or more of the conflicting personalities being considered.
This, I showed, would first freeze the Second Empire into an unprofitable mold, and then,
eventually, inflict more damage through civil wars than would have taken place had a
compromise never been made in the first place. Fortunately, that could be prevented, too. And
that was my contribution."
"If I may interrupt, Speaker– How is a change made?"
"Through the agency of the Radiant. You will find in your own case, for instance, that your
mathematics will be checked rigorously by five different boards; and that you will be required to
defend it against a concerted and merciless attack. Two years will then pass, and your
development will be reviewed again. It has happened more than once that a seemingly perfect
piece of work has uncovered its fallacies only after an induction period of months or years.
Sometimes, the contributor himself discovers the flaw.
"If, after two years, another examination, not less detailed than the first, still passes it, and –
better still – if in the interim the young scientist has brought to light additional details, subsidiary
evidence, the contribution will be added to the Plan. It was the climax of my career; it will be the
climax of yours.
"The Prime Radiant can be adjusted to your mind, and all corrections and additions can be
made through mental rapport. There will be nothing to indicate that the correction or addition is
yours. In all the history of the Plan there has been no personalization. It is rather a creation of
all of us together. Do you understand?"
"Yes, Speaker!"
"Then, enough of that." A stride to the Prime Radiant, and the walls were blank again save for
the ordinary room-lighting region along the upper borders. "Sit down here at my desk, and let
me talk to you. It is enough for a Psychohistorian, as such, to know his Biostatistics and his
Neurochemical Electromathematics. Some know nothing else and are fit only to be statistical
technicians. But a Speaker must be able to discuss the Plan without mathematics. If not the
Plan itself, at least its philosophy and its aims.
"First of all, what is the aim of the Plan? Please tell me in your own words – and don't grope for
fine sentiment. You won't be judged on polish and suavity, I assure you."
It was the Student's first chance at more than a bisyllable, and he hesitated before plunging into
the expectant space cleared away for him. He said, diffidently: "As a result of what I have
learned, I believe that it is the intention of the Plan to establish a human civilization based on an
orientation entirely different from anything that ever before existed. An orientation which,
according to the findings of Psychohistory, could never spontaneously come into being–"
"Stop!" The First Speaker was insistent. 'You must not say 'never.' That is a lazy slurring over of
the facts. Actually, Psychohistory predicts only probabilities. A particular event may be
infinitesimally probable, but the probability is always greater than zero."
"Yes, Speaker. The orientation desired, if I may correct myself, then, is well known to possess
no significant probability of spontaneously coming to pass."
"Better. What is the orientation?"
"It is that of a civilization based on mental science. In all the known history of Mankind,
advances have been made primarily in physical technology; in the capacity of handling the
inanimate world about Man. Control of self and society has been left to chance or to the vague
gropings of intuitive ethical systems based on inspiration and emotion. As a result, no culture of
greater stability than about fifty-five percent has ever existed, and these only as the result of
great human misery."
"And why is the orientation we speak of a nonspontaneous one?"
"Because a large minority of human beings are mentally equipped to take part in the advance
of physical science, and all receive the crude and visible benefits thereof. Only an insignificant
minority, however, are inherently able to lead Man through the greater involvements of Mental
Science; and the benefits derived therefrom, while longer lasting, are more subtle and less
apparent. Furthermore, since such an orientation would lead to the development of a
benevolent dictatorship of the mentally best – virtually a higher subdivision of Man – it would be
resented and could not be stable without the application of a force which would depress the
rest of Mankind to brute level. Such a development is repugnant to us and must be avoided."
"What, then, is the solution?"
"The solution is the Seldon Plan. Conditions have been so arranged and so maintained that in a
millennium from its beginnings – six hundred years from now, a Second Galactic Empire will
have been established in which Mankind will be ready for the leadership of Mental Science. In
that same interval, the Second Foundation in its development, will have brought forth a group of
Psychologists ready to assume leadership. Or, as I have myself often thought, the First
Foundation supplies the physical framework of a single political unit, and the Second
Foundation supplies the mental framework of a ready-made ruling class."
"I see. Fairly adequate. Do you think that any Second Empire, even if formed in the time set by
Seldon, would do as a fulfillment of his Plan?"
"No, Speaker, I do not. There are several possible Second Empires that may be formed in the
period of time stretching from nine hundred to seventeen hundred years after the inception of
the Plan, but only one of these is the Second Empire."
"And in view of all this, why is it necessary that the existence of the Second Foundation be
hidden – above all, from the First Foundation?"
The Student probed for a hidden meaning to the question and failed to find it. He was troubled
in his answer, "For the same reason that the details of the Plan as a whole must be hidden from
Mankind in general. The laws of Psychohistory are statistical in nature and are rendered invalid
if the actions of individual men are not random in nature. If a sizable group of human beings
learned of key details of the Plan, their actions would be governed by that knowledge and
would no longer be random in the meaning of the axioms of Psychohistory. In other words, they
would no longer be perfectly predictable. Your pardon, Speaker, but I feel that the answer is not
satisfactory."
"It is well that you do. Your answer is quite incomplete. It is the Second Foundation itself which
must be hidden, not simply the Plan. The Second Empire is not yet formed. We have still a
society which would resent a ruling class of psychologists, and which would fear its
development and fight against it. Do you understand that?"
"Yes, Speaker, I do. The point has never been stressed–"
"Don't minimize. It has never been made – in the classroom, though you should be capable of
deducing it yourself. This and many other points we will make now and in the near future during
your apprenticeship. You will see me again in a week. By that time, I would like to have
comments from you as to a certain problem which I now set before you. I don't want complete
and rigorous mathematical treatment. That would take a year for an expert, and not a week for
you. But I do want an indication as to trends and directions
"You have here a fork in the Plan at a period in time of about half a century ago. The necessary
details are included. You will note that the path followed by the assumed reality diverges from
all the plotted predictions; its probability being under one percent. You will estimate for how
long the divergence may continue before it becomes uncorrectable. Estimate also the probable
end if uncorrected, and a reasonable method of correction."
The Student flipped the Viewer at random and looked stonily at the passages presented on the
tiny, built-in screen.
He said: "Why this particular problem, Speaker? It obviously has significance other than purely
academic."
"Thank you, my boy. You are as quick as I had expected. The problem is not supposititious.
Nearly half a century ago, the Mule burst into Galactic history and for ten years was the largest
single fact in the universe. He was unprovided for; uncalculated for. He bent the Plan seriously,
but not fatally.
"To stop him before he did become fatal, however, we were forced to take active part against
him. We revealed our existence, and infinitely worse, a portion of our power. The First
Foundation has learned of us, and their actions are now predicated on that knowledge.
Observe in the problem presented. Here. And here.
"Naturally, you will not speak of this to anyone."
There was an appalled pause, as realization seeped into the Student. He said: "Then the
Seldon Plan has failed!"
"Not yet. It merely may have failed. The probabilities of success are still twenty-one point four
percent, as of the last assessment."
9
The Conspirators
For Dr. Darell and Pelleas Anthor, the evenings passed in friendly intercourse; the days in
pleasant unimportance. It might have been an ordinary visit. Dr. Darell introduced the young
man as a cousin from across space, and interest was dulled by the cliché.
Somehow, however, among the small talk, a name might be mentioned. There would be an
easy thoughtfulness. Dr. Darell might say, "No," or he might say, "Yes." A call on the open
Communi-wave issued a casual invitation, "Want you to meet my cousin."
And Arcadia's preparations proceeded in their own manner. In fact, her actions might be
considered the least straightforward of all.
For instance, she induced Olynthus Dam at school to donate to her a home-built, self-contained
sound-receiver by methods which indicated a future for her that promised peril to all males with
whom she might come into contact. To avoid details, she merely exhibited such an interest in
Olynthus' self-publicized hobby – he had a home workshop-combined with such a
well-modulated transfer of this interest to Olynthus' own pudgy features, that the unfortunate
youth found himself: 1) discoursing at great and animated length upon the principles of the
hyperwave motor; 2) becoming dizzyingly aware of the great, absorbed eyes that rested so
lightly upon his; and 3) forcing into her willing hands his own greatest creation, the aforesaid
sound-receiver.
Arcadia cultivated Olynthus in diminishing degree thereafter for just long enough to remove all
suspicion that the sound-receiver had been the cause of the friendship. For months afterwards,
Olynthus felt the memory of that short period in his life over and over again with the tendrils of
his mind, until finally, for lack of further addition, he gave up and let it slip away.
When the seventh evening came, and five men sat in the Darell living room with food within and
tobacco without, Arcadia's desk upstairs was occupied by this quite unrecognizable
home-product of Olynthus' ingenuity.
Five men then. Dr. Darell, of course, with graying hair and meticulous clothing, looking
somewhat older than his forty-two years. Pelleas Author, serious and quick-eyed at the moment
looking young and unsure of himself. And the three new men: Jole Turbor, visicastor, bulky and
plump-lipped; Dr. Elvett Semic, professor-emeritus of physics at the University, scrawny and
wrinkled, his clothes only half-filled; Homir Munn, librarian, lanky and terribly ill-at-ease.
Dr. Darell spoke easily, in a normal, matter-of-fact tone: "This gathering has been arranged,
gentlemen, for a trifle more than merely social reasons. You may have guessed this. Since you
have been deliberately chosen because of your backgrounds, you may also guess the danger
involved. I won't minimize it, but I will point out that we are all condemned men, in any case.
"You will notice that none of you have been invited with any attempt at secrecy. None of you
have been asked to come here unseen. The windows are not adjusted to non-insight. No
screen of any sort is about the room. We have only to attract the attention of the enemy to be
ruined; and the best way to attract that attention is to assume a false and theatrical secrecy.
(Hah, thought Arcadia, bending over the voices coming – a bit screechily – out of the little box.)
"Do you understand that?"
Elvett Semic twitched his lower lip and bared his teeth in the screwup, wrinkled gesture that
preceded his every sentence. "Oh, get on with it. Tell us about the youngster."
Dr. Darell said, "Pelleas Anthor is his name. He was a student of my old colleague, Kleise, who
died last year. Kleise sent me his brain-pattern to the fifth sublevel, before he died, which
pattern has been now checked against that of the man before you. You know, of course, that a
brain-pattern cannot be duplicated that far, even by men of the Science of Psychology. If you
don't know that, you'll have to take my word for it."
Turbor said, purse-lipped, "We might as well make a beginning somewheres. We'll take your
word for it, especially since you're the greatest electroneurologist in the Galaxy now that Kleise
is dead. At least, that is the way I've described you in my visicast comment, and I even believe
it myself. How old are you, Anthor?"
"Twenty-nine, Mr. Turbor."
"Hm-m-m. And are you an electroneurologist, too? A great one?"
"Just a student of the science. But I work hard, and I've had the benefit of Kleise's training."
Munn broke in. He had a slight stammer at periods of tension. "I ... I wish you'd g ... get started.
I think everyone's t ... talking too much."
Dr. Darell lifted an eyebrow in Munn's direction. you're right, Homir. Take over, Pelleas."
"Not for a while," said Pelleas Anthor, slowly, "because before we can get started – although I
appreciate Mr. Munn's sentiment – I must request brain-wave data."
Darell frowned. "What is this, Anthor? What brain-wave data do you refer to?"
"The patterns of all of you. You have taken mine, Dr. Darell. I must take yours and those of the
rest of you. And I must take the measurements myself."
Turbor said, "There's no reason for him to trust us, Darell. The young man is within his rights."
"Thank you," said Anthor. "If you’ll lead the way to your laboratory then, Dr. Darell, well
proceed. I took the liberty this morning of checking your apparatus."
The science of electroencephalography was at once new and old. It was old in the sense that
the knowledge of the microcurrents generated by nerve cells of living beings belonged to that
immense category of human knowledge whose origin was completely lost It was knowledge
that stretched back as far as the earliest remnants of human history–
And yet it was new, too. The fact of the existence of microcurrents slumbered through the tens
of thousands of years of Galactic Empire as one of those vivid and whimsical, but quite
useless, items of human knowledge. Some had attempted to form classifications of waves into
waking and sleeping, calm and excited, well and ill – but even the broadest conceptions had
had their hordes of vitiating exceptions.
Others had tried to show the existence of brain-wave groups, analogous to the well-known
blood groups, and to show that external environment was the defining factor. These were the
race-minded people who claimed that Man could be divided into subspecies. But such a
philosophy could make no headway against the overwhelming ecumenical drive involved in the
fact of Galactic Empire – one political unit covering twenty million stellar systems, involving all
of Man from the central world of Trantor – now a gorgeous and impossible memory of the great
past – to the loneliest asteroid on the periphery.
And then again, in a society given over, as that of the First Empire was, to the physical
sciences and inanimate technology, there was a vague but mighty sociological push away from
the study of the mind. It was less respectable because less immediately useful; and it was
poorly financed since it was less profitable.
After the disintegration of the First Empire, there came the fragmentation of organized science,
back, back – past even the fundamentals of atomic power into the chemical power of coal and
oil. The one exception to this, of course, was the First Foundation where the spark of science,
revitalized and grown more intense was maintained and fed to flame. Yet there, too, it was the
physical that ruled, and the brain, except for surgery, was neglected ground.
Hari Seldon was the first to express what afterwards came to be accepted as truth.
"Neural microcurrents," he once said, "carry within them the spark of every varying impulse and
response, conscious and unconscious. The brain-waves recorded on neatly squared paper in
trembling peaks and troughs are the mirrors of the combined thought-pulses of billions of cells.
Theoretically, analysis should reveal the thoughts and emotions of the subject, to the last and
least. Differences should be detected that are due not only to gross physical defects, inherited
or acquired, but also to shifting states of emotion, to advancing education and experience, even
to something as subtle as a change in the subject's philosophy of life."
But even Seldon could approach no further than speculation.
And now for fifty years, the men of the First Foundation had been tearing at that incredibly vast
and complicated storehouse of new knowledge. The approach, naturally, was made through
new techniques – as, for example, the use of electrodes at skull sutures by a newly-developed
means which enabled contact to be made directly with the gray cells, without even the
necessity of shaving a patch of skull. And then there was a recording device which
automatically recorded the brain-wave data as an overall total, and as separate functions of six
independent variables.
What was most significant, perhaps, was the growing respect in which encephalography and
the encephalographer was held. Kleise, the greatest of them, sat at scientific conventions on an
equal basis with the physicist. Dr. Darell, though no longer active in the science, was known for
his brilliant advances in encephalographic analysis almost as much as for the fact that he was
the son of Bayta Darell, the great heroine of the past generation.
And so now, Dr. Darell sat in his own chair, with the delicate touch of the feathery electrodes
scarcely hinting at pressure upon his skull, while the vacuum-incased needles wavered to and
fro. His back was to the recorder – otherwise, as was well known, the sight of the moving
curves induced an unconscious effort to control them, with noticeable results – but he knew that
the central dial was expressing the strongly rhythmic and little-varying Sigma curve, which was
to be expected of his own powerful and disciplined mind. It would be strengthened and purified
in the subsidiary dial dealing with the Cerebellar wave. There would be the sharp,
near-discontinuous leaps from the frontal lobe, and the subdued shakiness from the subsurface
regions with its narrow range of frequencies–
He knew his own brain-wave pattern much as an artist might be perfectly aware of the color of
his eyes.
Pelleas Anthor made no comment when Darell rose from the reclining chair. The young man
abstracted the seven recordings, glanced at them with the quick, all-embracing eyes of one
who knows exactly what tiny facet of near-nothingness is being looked for.
"If you don't mind, Dr. Semic."
Semic's age-yellowed face was serious. Electroencephalography was a science of his old age
of which he knew little; an upstart that he faintly resented. He knew that he was old and that his
wave-pattern would show it. The wrinkles on his face showed it, the stoop in his walk, the
shaking of his hand – but they spoke only of his body. The brain-wave patterns might show that
his mind was old, too. An embarrassing and unwarranted invasion of a man's last protecting
stronghold, his own mind.
The electrodes were adjusted. The process did not hurt, of course, from beginning to end.
There was just that tiny tingle, far below the threshold of sensation.
And then came Turbor, who sat quietly and unemotionally through the fifteen minute process,
and Munn, who jerked at the first touch of the electrodes and then spent the session rolling his
eyes as though he wished he could turn them backwards and watch through a hole in his
occiput.
"And now–" said Darell, when all was done.
"And now," said Anthor, apologetically, "there is one more person in the house."
Darell, frowning, said: "My daughter?"
'Yes. I suggested that she stay home tonight, if you'll remember."
"For encephalographical analysis? What in the Galaxy for?"
"I cannot proceed without it."
Darell shrugged and climbed the stairs. Arcadia, amply warned, had the sound-receiver off
when he entered; then followed him down with mild obedience. It was the first time in her life –
except for the taking of her basic mind pattern as an infant, for identification and registration
purposes – that she found herself under the electrodes.
"May I see," she asked, when it was over, holding out her hand.
Dr. Darell said, "You would not understand, Arcadia. Isn't it time for you to go to bed?"
"Yes, father," she said, demurely. "Good night, all."
She ran up the stairs and plumped into bed with a minimum of basic preparation. With
Olynthus' sound-receiver propped beside her pillow, she felt like a character out of a book-film,
and hugged every moment of it close to her chest in an ecstasy of "Spy-stuff."
The first words she heard were Anthor's and they were: "The analyses, gentlemen, are all
satisfactory. The child's as well."
Child, she thought disgustedly, and bristled at Anthor in the darkness.
Anthor had opened his briefcase now, and out of it, he took several dozen brain-wave records.
They were not originals. Nor had the briefcase been fitted with an ordinary lock. Had the key
been held in any hand other than his own, the contents thereof would have silently and instantly
oxidized to an indecipherable ash. Once removed from the briefcase, the records did so
anyway after half an hour.
But during their short lifetime, Anthor spoke quickly. "I have the records here of several minor
government officials at Anacreon. This is a psychologist at Locris University; this an industrialist
at Siwenna. The rest are as you see."
They crowded closely. To all but Darell, they were so many quivers on parchment. To Darell,
they shouted with a million tongues.
Anthor pointed lightly, "I call your attention, Dr. Darell, to the plateau region among the
secondary Tauian waves in the frontal lobe, which is what all these records have in common.
Would you use my Analytical Rule, sir, to check my statement?"
The Analytical Rule might be considered a distant relation – as a skyscraper is to a shack – of
that kindergarten toy, the logarithmic Slide Rule. Darell used it with the wristflip of long practice.
He made freehand drawings of the result and, as Anthor stated, there were featureless
plateaus in frontal lobe regions where strong swings should have been expected.
"How would you interpret that, Dr. Darell?" asked Anthor.
"I'm not sure. Offhand, I don't see how it's possible. Even in cases of amnesia, there is
suppression, but not removal. Drastic brain surgery, perhaps?"
"Oh, something's been cut out," cried Anthor, impatiently, "yes! Not in the physical sense,
however. You know, the Mule could have done just that. He could have suppressed completely
all capacity for a certain emotion or attitude of mind, and leave nothing but just such a flatness.
Or else–"
"Or else the Second Foundation could have done it. Is that it?" asked Turbor, with a slow smile.
There was no real need to answer that thoroughly rhetorical question.
"What made you suspicious, Mr. Anthor?" asked Munn.
"It wasn't I. It was Dr. Kleise. He collected brain-wave patterns much as the Planetary Police
do, but along different lines. He specialized in intellectuals, government officials and business
leaders. You see, it's quite obvious that if the Second Foundation is directing the historical
course of the Galaxy – of us – that they must do it subtly and in as minimal a fashion as
possible. If they work through minds, as they must, it is the minds of people with influence;
culturally, industrially, or politically. And with those he concerned himself."
"Yes," objected Munn, "but is there corroboration? How do these people act – I mean the ones
with the plateau. Maybe it's all a perfectly normal phenomenon." He looked hopelessly at the
others out of his, somehow, childlike blue eyes, but met no encouraging return.
"I leave that to Dr. Darell," said Anthor. "Ask him how many times he's seen this phenomenon
in his general studies, or in reported cases in the literature over the past generation. Then ask
him the chances of it being discovered in almost one out of every thousand cases among the
categories Dr. Kleise studied."
"I suppose that there is no doubt," said Darell, thoughtfully, "that these are artificial mentalities.
They have been tampered with. In a way, I have suspected this–"
"I know that, Dr. Darell," said Author. "I also know you once worked with Dr. Kleise. I would like
to know why you stopped."
There wasn't actually hostility in his question. Perhaps nothing more than caution; but, at any
rate, it resulted in a long pause. Darell looked from one to another of his guests, then said
brusquely, "Because there was no point to Kleise's battle. He was competing with an adversary
too strong for him. He was detecting what we – he and I – knew he would detect – that we were
not our own masters. And I didn't want to know! I had my self-respect. I liked to think that our
Foundation was captain of its collective soul; that our forefathers had not quite fought and died
for nothing. I thought it would be most simple to turn my face away as long as I was not quite
sure. I didn't need my position since the Government pension awarded to my mother's family in
perpetuity would take care of my uncomplicated needs. My home laboratory would suffice to
keep boredom away, and life would some day end– Then Kleise died–"
Semic showed his teeth and said: "This fellow Kleise; I don't know him. How did he die?"
Anthor cut in: "He died. He thought he would. He told me half a year before that he was getting
too close--"
"Now we're too c ... close, too, aren't we?" suggested Munn, dry-mouthed, as his Adam's apple
jiggled.
"Yes," said Anthor, flatly, "but we were, anyway – all of us. It's why you've all been chosen. I'm
Kleise's student. Dr. Darell was his colleague. Jole Turbor has been denouncing our blind faith
in the saving hand of the Second Foundation on the air, until the government shut him off –
through the agency, I might mention, of a powerful financier whose brain shows what Kleise
used to call the Tamper Plateau. Homir Munn has the largest home collection of Muliana – if I
may use the phrase to signify collected data concerning the Mule – in existence, and has
published some papers containing speculation on the nature and function of the Second
Foundation. Dr. Semic has contributed as much as anyone to the mathematics of
encephalographic analysis, though I don't believe he realized that his mathematics could be so
applied."
Semic opened his eyes wide and chuckled gaspingly, "No, young fellow. I was analyzing
intranuclear motions – the n-body problem, you know. I'm lost in encephalography."
"Then we know where we stand. The government can, of course, do nothing about the matter.
Whether the mayor or anyone in his administration is aware of the seriousness of the situation,
I don't know. But this I do know – we five have nothing to lose and stand to gain much. With
every increase in our knowledge, we can widen ourselves in safe directions. We are but a
beginning, you understand."
"How widespread," put in Turbor, "is this Second Foundation infiltration?"
"I don't know. There's a flat answer. All the infiltrations we have discovered were on the outer
fringes of the nation. The capital world may yet be clean, though even that is not certain – else I
would not have tested you. You were particularly suspicious, Dr. Darell, since you abandoned
research with Kleise. Kleise never forgave you, you know. I thought that perhaps the Second
Foundation had corrupted you, but Kleise always insisted that you were a coward. You'll forgive
me, Dr. Darell, if I explain this to make my own position clear. I, personally, think I understand
your attitude, and, if it was cowardice, I consider it venial."
Darell drew a breath before replying. "I ran away! Call it what you wish. I tried to maintain our
friendship, however, yet he never wrote nor called me until the day he sent me your brainwave
data, and that was scarcely a week before he died–"
"If you don't mind," interrupted Homir Munn, with a flash of nervous eloquence, "I d ... don't see
what you think you're doing. We're a p ... poor bunch of conspirators, if we're just going to talk
and talk and t ... talk. And I don't see what else we can do, anyway. This is v ... very childish. B
... brain-waves and mumbo jumbo and all that. Is there just one thing you intend to do?"
Pelleas Author's eyes were bright, "Yes, there is. We need more information on the Second
Foundation. It's the prime necessity. The Mule spent the first five years of his rule in just that
quest for information and failed – or so we have all been led to believe. But then he stopped
looking. Why? Because he failed? Or because he succeeded?"
"M ... more talk," said Munn, bitterly. "How are we ever to know?"
"If you'll listen to me– The Mule's capital was on Kalgan. Kalgan was not part of the
Foundation's commercial sphere of influence before the Mule and it is not part of it now. Kalgan
is ruled, at the moment, by the man, Stettin, unless there's another palace revolution by
tomorrow. Stettin calls himself First Citizen and considers himself the successor of the Mule. If
there is any tradition in that world, it rests with the super-humanity and greatness of the Mule –
a tradition almost superstitious in intensity. As a result, the Mule's old palace is maintained as a
shrine. No unauthorized person may enter; nothing within has ever been touched."
"Well?"
"Well, why is that so? At times like these, nothing happens without a reason. What if it is not
superstition only that makes the Mule's palace inviolate? What if the Second Foundation has so
arranged matters? In short what if the results of the Mule's five-year search are within–"
"Oh, p ... poppycock."
"Why not?" demanded Anthor. "Throughout its history the Second Foundation has hidden itself
and interfered in Galactic affairs in minimal fashion only. I know that to us it would seem more
logical to destroy the Palace or, at the least, to remove the data. But you must consider the
psychology of these master psychologists. They are Seldons; they are Mules and they work by
indirection, through the mind. They would never destroy or remove when they could achieve
their ends by creating a state of mind. Eh?"
No immediate answer, and Anthor continued, "And you, Munn, are just the one to get the
information we need."
"I?" It was an astounded yell. Munn looked from one to the other rapidly, "I can't do such a
thing. I'm no man of action; no hero of any teleview. I'm a librarian. If I can help you that way, all
right, and I'll risk the Second Foundation, but I'm not going out into space on any qu ... quixotic
thing like that."
"Now, look," said Anthor, patiently, "Dr. Darell and I have both agreed that you're the man. It's
the only way to do it naturally. You say you're a librarian. Fine! What is your main field of
interest? Muliana! You already have the greatest collection of material on the Mule in the
Galaxy. It is natural for you to want more; more natural for you than for anyone else. You could
request entrance to the Kalgan Palace without arousing suspicion of ulterior motives. You might
be refused but you would not be suspected. What's more, you have a one-man cruiser. You're
known to have visited foreign planets during your annual vacation. You've even been on Kalgan
before. Don't you understand that you need only act as you always have?"
"But I can't just say, 'W ... won't you kindly let me in to your most sacred shrine, M ... Mr. First
Citizen?’"
"Why not?"
"Because, by the Galaxy, he won't let me!"
"All right, then. So he won't Then you'll come home and we’ll think of something else."
Munn looked about in helpless rebellion. He felt himself being talked into something he hated.
No one offered to help him extricate himself.
So in the end two decisions were made in Dr. Darell's house. The first was a reluctant one of
agreement on the part of Munn to take off into space as soon as his summer vacation began.
The other was a highly unauthorized decision on the part of a thoroughly unofficial member of
the gathering, made as she clicked off a sound-receiver and composed herself for a belated
sleep. This second decision does not concern us just yet.
10
Approaching Crisis
A week had passed on the Second Foundation, and the First Speaker was smiling once again
upon the Student.
"You must have brought me interesting results, or you would not be so filled with anger."
The Student put his hand upon the sheaf of calculating paper he had brought with him and
said, "Are you sure that the problem is a factual one?"
"The premises are true. I have distorted nothing."
"Then I must accept the results, and I do not want to."
"Naturally. But what have your wants to do with it? Well, tell me what disturbs you so. No, no,
put your derivations to one side. I will subject them to analysis afterward. Meanwhile, talk to
me. Let me judge your understanding."
"Well, then, Speaker– It becomes very apparent that a gross overall change in the basic
psychology of the First Foundation has taken place. As long as they knew of the existence of a
Seldon Plan, without knowing any of the details thereof, they were confident but uncertain.
They knew they would succeed, but they didn't know when or how. There was, therefore, a
continuous atmosphere of tension and strain – which was what Seldon desired. The First
Foundation, in other words, could be counted upon to work at maximum potential."
"A doubtful metaphor," said the First Speaker, "but I understand you."
"But now, Speaker, they know of the existence of a Second Foundation in what amounts to
detail, rather merely than as an ancient and vague statement of Seldon's. They have an inkling
as to its function as the guardian of the Plan. They know that an agency exists which watches
their every step and will not let them fall. So they abandon their purposeful stride and allow
themselves to be carried upon a litter. Another metaphor, I'm afraid."
"Nevertheless, go on."
"And that very abandonment of effort; that growing inertia; that lapse into softness and into a
decadent and hedonistic culture, means the ruin of the Plan. They must be self-propelled."
"Is that all?"
"No, there is more. The majority reaction is as described. But a great probability exists for a
minority reaction. Knowledge of our guardianship and our control will rouse among a few, not
complacence, but hostility. This follows from Korillov's Theorem–"
"Yes, yes. I know the theorem."
"I'm sorry, Speaker. It is difficult to avoid mathematics. In any case, the effect is that not only is
the Foundation's effort diluted, but part of it is turned against us, actively against us."
"And is that all?"
"There remains one other factor of which the probability is moderately low---"
"Very good. What is that?"
"While the energies of the First Foundation were directed only to Empire; while their only
enemies were huge and outmoded hulks that remained from the shambles of the past, they
were obviously concerned only with the physical sciences. With us forming a new, large part of
their environment, a change in view may well be imposed on them. They may try to become
psychologists–"
"That change," said the First Speaker, coolly, "has already taken place."
The Student's lips compressed themselves into a pale line. "Then all is over. It is the basic
incompatibility with the Plan. Speaker, would I have known of this if I had lived – outside?"
The First Speaker spoke seriously, "You feel humiliated, my young man, because, thinking you
understood so much so well, you suddenly find that many very apparent things were unknown
to you. Thinking you were one of the Lords of the Galaxy; you suddenly find that you stand near
to destruction. Naturally, you will resent the ivory tower in which you lived; the seclusion in
which you were educated; the theories on which you were reared.
"I once had that feeling. It is normal. Yet it was necessary that in your formative years you have
no direct contact with the Galaxy, that you remain here, where all knowledge is filtered to you,
and your mind carefully sharpened. We could have shown you this ... this part-failure of the
Plan earlier and spared you the shock now, but you would not have understood the significance
properly, as you now will. Then you find no solution at all to the problem?"
The Student shook his head and said hopelessly, "None!"
"Well, it is not surprising. Listen to me, young man. A course of action exists and has been
followed for over a decade. It is not a usual course, but one that we have been forced into
against our will. It involves low probabilities, dangerous assumptions– We have even been
forced to deal with individual reactions at times, because that was the only possible way, and
you know that Psychostatistics by its very nature has no meaning when applied to less than
planetary numbers."
"Are we succeeding?" gasped the Student.
"There's no way of telling yet. We have kept the situation stable so far – but for the first time in
the history of the Plan, it is possible for the unexpected actions of a single individual to destroy
it. We have adjusted a minimum number of outsiders to a needful state of mind; we have our
agents – but their paths are planned. They dare not improvise. That should be obvious to you.
And I will not conceal the worst – if we are discovered, here, on this world, it will not only be the
Plan that is destroyed, but ourselves, our physical selves. So you see, our solution is not very
good."
"But the little you have described does not sound like a solution at all, but like a desperate
guess."
"No. Let us say, an intelligent guess."
"When is the crisis, Speaker? When will we know whether we have succeeded or not?"
"Well within the year, no doubt."
The Student considered that, then nodded his head. He shook hands with the Speaker. "Well,
it's good to know."
He turned on his heel and left.
The first Speaker looked out silently as the window gained transparency. Past the giant
structures to the quite, crowding stars.
A year would pass quickly. Would any of them, any of Seldon's heritage, be alive at its end?
11
Stowaway
It was a little over a month before the summer could be said to have started. Started, that is, to
the extent that Homir Munn had written his final financial report of the fiscal year, seen to it that
the substitute librarian supplied by the Government was sufficiently aware of the subtleties of
the post – last year's man had been quite unsatisfactory – and arranged to have his little cruiser
the Unimara – named after a tender and mysterious episode of twenty years past – taken out of
its winter cobwebbery.
He left Terminus in a sullen distemper. No one was at the port to see him off. That would not
have been natural since no one ever had in the past. He knew very well that it was important to
have this trip in no way different from any he had made in the past, yet he felt drenched in a
vague resentment. He, Homir Munn, was risking his neck in derring-doery of the most
outrageous sort, and yet he left alone.
At least, so he thought.
And it was because he thought wrongly, that the following day was one of confusion, both on
the Unimara and in Dr. Darell's suburban home.
It hit Dr. Darell's home first, in point of time, through the medium of Poli, the maid, whose
month's vacation was now quite a thing of the past. She flew down the stairs in a flurry and
stutter.
The good doctor met her and she tried vainly to put emotion into words but ended by thrusting
a sheet of paper and a cubical object at him.
He took them unwillingly and said: "What's wrong, Poli?"
"She's gone, doctor."
"Who's gone?"
"Arcadia!"
"What do you mean, gone? Gone where? What are you talking about?"
And she stamped her foot: 'I don't know. She's gone, and there's a suitcase and some clothes
gone with her and there's that letter. Why don't you read it, instead of just standing there? Oh,
you men!"
Dr. Darell shrugged and opened the envelope. The letter was not long, and except for the
angular signature, "Arkady," was in the ornate and flowing handwriting of Arcadia's transcriber.
Dear Father:
It would have been simply too heartbreaking to say good-by to you in person. I
might have cried like a little girl and you would have been ashamed of me. So I'm
writing a letter instead to tell you how much III miss you, even while I'm having this
perfectly wonderful summer vacation with Uncle Homir. III take good care of myself
and it won't be long before I’m home again. Meanwhile, I'm leaving you something
that's all my own. You can have it now.
Your loving daughter,
Arkady.
He read it through several times with an expression that grew blanker each time. He said stiffly,
"Have you read this, Poli?"
Poli was instantly on the defensive. "I certainly can't be blamed for that, doctor. The envelope
has 'Poli' written on the outside, and I had no way of telling there was a letter for you on the
inside. I'm no snoop, doctor, and in the years I've been with–"
Darell held up a placating hand, "Very well, Poli. It's not important. I just wanted to make sure
you understood what had happened."
He was considering rapidly. It was no use telling her to forget the matter. With regard to the
enemy, "forget" was a meaningless word; and the advice, insofar as it made the matter more
important, would have had an opposite effect.
He said instead, "She's a queer little girl, you know. Very romantic. Ever since we arranged to
have her go off on a space trip this summer, she's been quite excited."
"And just why has no one told me about this space trip?"
"It was arranged while you were away, and we forgot It's nothing more complicated than that."
Poli's original emotions now concentrated themselves into a single, overwhelming indignation,
"Simple, is it? The poor chick has gone off with one suitcase, without a decent stitch of clothes
to her, and alone at that. How long will she be away?"
"Now I won't have you worrying about it, Poli. There will be plenty of clothes for her on the ship.
It's been all arranged. Will you tell Mr. Anthor, that I want to see him? Oh, and first – is this the
object that Arcadia has left for me?" He turned it over in his hand.
Poli tossed her head. "I'm sure I don't know. The letter was on top of it and that's every bit I can
tell you. Forget to tell me, indeed. If her mother were alive–"
Darell, waved her away. "Please call Mr. Anthor."
Anthor's viewpoint on the matter differed radically from that of Arcadia's father. He punctuated
his initial remarks with clenched fists and tom hair, and from there, passed on to bitterness.
"Great Space, what are you waiting for? What are we both waiting for? Get the spaceport on
the viewer and have them contact the Unimara."
"Softly, Pelleas, she's my daughter."
"But it's not your Galaxy."
"Now, wait. She's an intelligent girl, Pelleas, and she's thought this thing out carefully. We had
better follow her thoughts while this thing is fresh. Do you know what this thing is?"
"No. Why should it matter what it is?'
"Because it's a sound-receiver."
"That thing?"
"It's homemade, but it will work. I've tested it. Don't you see? It's her way of telling us that she's
been a party to our conversations of policy. She knows where Homir Munn is going and why.
She's decided it would be exciting to go along."
"Oh, Great Space," groaned the younger man. "Another mind for the Second Foundation to
pick."
"Except that there's no reason why the Second Foundation should, a priori, suspect a
fourteen-year-old girl of being a danger – unless we do anything to attract attention to her, such
as calling back a ship out of space for no reason other than to take her off. Do you forget with
whom we're dealing? How narrow the margin is that separates us from discovery? How
helpless we are thereafter?"
"But we can't have everything depend on an insane child."
She's not insane, and we have no choice. She need not have written the letter, but she did it to
keep us from going to the police after a lost child. Her letter suggests that we convert the entire
matter into a friendly offer on the part of Munn to take an old friend's daughter off for a short
vacation. And why not? He's been my friend for nearly twenty years. He's known her since she
was three, when I brought her back from Trantor. It's a perfectIy natural thing, and, in fact,
ought to decrease suspicion. A spy does not carry a fourteen-year-old niece about with him."
"So. And what will Munn do when he finds her?"
Dr. Darell heaved his eyebrows once. "I can't say – but I presume she’ll handle him."
But the house was somehow very lonely at night and Dr. Darell found that the fate of the
Galaxy made remarkably little difference while his daughter's mad little life was in danger.
The excitement on the Unimara, if involving fewer people, was considerably more intense.
In the luggage compartment, Arcadia found herself, in the first place, aided by experience, and
in the second, hampered by the reverse.
Thus, she met the initial acceleration with equanimity and the more subtle nausea that
accompanied the inside-outness of the first jump through hyperspace with stoicism. Both had
been experienced on space hops before, and she was tensed for them. She knew also that
luggage compartments were included in the ship's ventilation-system and that they could even
be bathed in wall-light. This last, however, she excluded as being too unconscionably
unromantic. She remained in the dark, as a conspirator should, breathing very softly, and
listening to the little miscellany of noises that surrounded Homir Munn.
They were undistinguished noises, the kind made by a man alone. The shuffling of shoes, the
rustle of fabric against metal, the soughing of an upholstered chair seat retreating under weight,
the sharp click of a control unit, or the soft slap of a palm over a photoelectric cell.
Yet, eventually, it was the lack of experience that caught up with Arcadia. In the book films and
on the videos, the stowaway seemed to have such an infinite capacity for obscurity. Of course,
there was always the danger of dislodging something which would fall with a crash, or of
sneezing – in videos you were almost sure to sneeze; it was an accepted matter. She knew all
this, and was careful. There was also the realization that thirst and hunger might be
encountered. For this, she was prepared with ration cans out of the pantry. But yet things
remained that the films never mentioned, and it dawned upon Arcadia with a shock that,
despite the best intentions in the world, she could stay hidden in the closet for only a limited
time.
And on a one-man sports-cruiser, such as the Unimara, living space consisted, essentially, of a
single room, so that there wasn't even the risky possibility of sneaking out of the compartment
while Munn was engaged elsewhere.
She waited frantically for the sounds of sleep to arise. If only she knew whether he snored. At
least she knew where the bunk was and she could recognize the rolling protest of one when
she heard it. There was a long breath and then a yawn. She waited through a gathering
silence, punctuated by the bunk's soft protest against a changed position or a shifted leg.
The door of the luggage compartment opened easily at the pressure of her finger, and her
craning neck–
There was a definite human sound that broke off sharply.
Arcadia solidified. Silence! Still silence!
She tried to poke her eyes outside the door without moving her head and failed. The head
followed the eyes.
Homir Munn was awake, of course – reading in bed, bathed in the soft, unspreading bed light,
staring into the darkness with wide eyes, and groping one hand stealthily under the pillow.
Arcadia's head moved sharply back of itself. Then, the light went out entirely and Munn's voice
said with shaky sharpness, "I've got a blaster, and I'm shooting, by the Galaxy–"
And Arcadia wailed, "It's only me. Don't shoot."
Remarkable what a fragile flower romance is. A gun with a nervous operator behind it can spoil
the whole thing.
The light was back on – all over the ship – and Munn was sitting up in bed. The somewhat
grizzled hair on his thin chest and the sparse one-day growth on his chin lent him an entirely
fallacious appearance of disreputability.
Arcadia stepped out, yanking at her metallene jacket which was supposed to be guaranteed
wrinkleproof.
After a wild moment in which he almost jumped out of bed, but remembered, and instead
yanked the sheet up to his shoulders, Munn gargled, "W ... wha ... what–"
He was completely incomprehensible.
Arcadia said meekly, "Would you excuse me for a minute? I've got to wash my hands." She
knew the geography of the vessel, and slipped away quickly. When she returned, with her
courage oozing back, Homir Munn was standing before her with a faded bathrobe on the
outside and a brilliant fury on the inside.
"What the black holes of Space are you d ... doing aboard this ship? H ... how did you get on
here? What do you th ... think I'm supposed to do with you? What's going on here?"
He might have asked questions indefinitely, but Arcadia interrupted sweetly, "I just wanted to
come along, Uncle Homir."
"Why? I'm not going anywhere?"
"You're going to Kalgan for information about the Second Foundation."
And Munn let out a wild howl and collapsed completely. For one horrified moment, Arcadia
thought he would have hysterics or beat his head against the wall. He was still holding the
blaster and her stomach grew ice-cold as she watched it.
"Watch out– Take it easy–" was all she could think of to say.
But he struggled back to relative normality and threw the blaster on to the bunk with a force that
should have set it off and blown a hole through the ship's hull.
"How did you get on?" he asked slowly, as though gripping each word with his teeth very
carefully to prevent it from trembling before letting it out.
"It was easy. I just came into the hangar with my suitcase, and said, 'Mr. Munn's baggage!' and
the man in charge just waved his thumb without even looking up."
"I'll have to take you back, you know," said Homir, and there was a sudden wild glee within him
at the thought. By Space, this wasn't his fault.
"You can't," said Arcadia, calmly, "it would attract attention."
"What?"
"You know. The whole purpose of your going to Kalgan was because it was natural for you to
go and ask for permission to look into the Mule's records. And you've got to be so natural that
you're to attract no attention at all. If you go back with a girl stowaway, it might even get into the
tele-news reports."
"Where did you g ... get those notions about Kalgan? These ... uh ... childish–" He was far too
flippant for conviction, of course, even to one who knew less than did Arcadia.
"I heard," she couldn't avoid pride completely, "with a sound-recorder. I know all about it – so
you've got to let me come along."
"What about your father?" He played a quick trump. "For all he knows, you're kidnapped ...
dead."
"I left a note," she said, overtrumping, "and he probably knows he mustn't make a fuss, or
anything. You'll probably get a space-gram from him."
To Munn the only explanation was sorcery, because the receiving signal sounded wildly two
seconds after she finished.
She said: "That's my father, I bet," and it was.
The message wasn't long and it was addressed to Arcadia. It said: "Thank you for your lovely
present, which I'm sure you put to good use. Have a good time."
"You see," she said, "that's instructions."
Homir grew used to her. After a while, he was glad she was there. Eventually, he wondered
how he would have made it without her. She prattIed! She was excited! Most of all, she was
completely unconcerned. She knew the Second Foundation was the enemy, yet it didn't bother
her. She knew that on Kalgan, he was to deal with a hostile officialdom, but she could hardly
wait.
Maybe it came of being fourteen.
At any rate, the week-long trip now meant conversation rather than introspection. To be sure, it
wasn't a very enlightening conversation, since it concerned, almost entirely, the girl's notions on
the subject of how best to treat the Lord of Kalgan. Amusing and nonsensical, and yet delivered
with weighty deliberation.
Homir found himself actually capable of smiling as he listened and wondered out of just which
gem of historical fiction she got her twisted notion of the great universe.
It was the evening before the last jump. Kalgan was a bright star in the scarcely-twinkling
emptiness of the outer reaches of the Galaxy. The ship's telescope made it a sparkling blob of
barely-perceptible diameter.
Arcadia sat cross-legged in the good chair. She was wearing a pair of slacks and a
none-too-roomy shirt that belonged to Homir. Her own more feminine wardrobe had been
washed and ironed for the landing.
She said, "I'm going to write historical novels, you know." She was quite happy about the trip.
Uncle Homir didn't the least mind listening to her and it made conversation so much more
pleasant when you could talk to a really intelligent person who was serious about what you
said.
She continued: "I've read books and books about all the great men of Foundation history. You
know, like Seldon, Hardin, Mallow, Devers and all the rest. I've even read most of what you've
written about the Mule, except that it isn't much fun to read those parts where the Foundation
loses. Wouldn't you rather read a history where they skipped the silly, tragic parts?"
"Yes, I would," Munn assured her, gravely. "But it wouldn't be a fair history, would it, Arkady?
You'd never get academic respect, unless you give the whole story."
"Oh, poof. Who cares about academic respect?" She found him delightful. He hadn't missed
calling her Arkady for days. "My novels are going to be interesting and are going to sell and be
famous. What's the use of writing books unless you sell them and become well-known? I don't
want just some old professors to know me. It's got to be everybody."
Her eyes darkened with pleasure at the thought and she wriggled into a more comfortable
position. "In fact, as soon as I can get father to let me, I'm going to visit Trantor, so's I can get
background material on the First Empire, you know. I was born on Trantor; did you know that?"
He did, but he said, "You were?" and put just the right amount of amazement into his voice. He
was rewarded with something between a beam and a simper.
"Uh-huh. My grandmother ... you know, Bayta Darell, you've heard of her ... was on Trantor
once with my grandfather. In fact, that's where they stopped the Mule, when all the Galaxy was
at his feet; and my father and mother went there also when they were first married. I was born
there. I even lived there till mother died, only I was just three then, and I don't remember much
about it. Were you ever on Trantor, Uncle Homir?"
"No, can't say I was." He leaned back against the cold bulkhead and listened idly. Kalgan was
very close, and he felt his uneasiness flooding back.
"Isn't it just the most romantic world? My father says that under Stannel V, it had more people
than any ten worlds nowadays. He says it was just one big world of metals – one big city – that
was the capital of all the Galaxy. He's shown me pictures that he took on Trantor. It's all in ruins
now, but it's still stupendous. I'd just love to see it again. In fact ... Homir!"
"Yes?"
"Why don't we go there, when we're finished with Kalgan?"
Some of the fright hurtled back into his face. "What? Now don't start on that. This is business,
not pleasure. Remember that."
"But it is business" she squeaked. "There might be incredible amounts of information on
Trantor, don't you think so?*
"No, I don't He scrambled to his feet "Now untangle yourself from the computer. We've got to
make the last jump, and then you turn in." One good thing about landing, anyway; he was about
fed up with trying to sleep on an overcoat on the metal floor.
The calculations were not difficult. The "Space Route Handbook" was quite explicit on the
Foundation-Kalgan route. There was the momentary twitch of the timeless passage through
hyperspace and the final light-year dropped away.
The sun of Kalgan was a sun now – large, bright, and yellow-white; invisible behind the
portholes that had automatically closed on the sun-lit side.
Kalgan was only a night's sleep away.
12
Lord
Of all the worlds of the Galaxy, Kalgan undoubtedly had the most unique history. That of the
planet Terminus, for instance, was that of an almost uninterrupted rise. That of Trantor, once
capital of the Galaxy, was that of an almost uninterrupted fall. But Kalgan–
Kalgan first gained fame as the pleasure world of the Galaxy two centuries before the birth of
Hari Seldon. It was a pleasure world in the sense that it made an industry – and an immensely
profitable one, at that – out of amusement.
And it was a stable industry. It was the most stable industry in the Galaxy. When all the Galaxy
perished as a civilization, little by little, scarcely a feather's weight of catastrophe fell upon
Kalgan. No matter how the economy and sociology of the neighboring sectors of the Galaxy
changed, there was always an elite; and it is always the characteristic of an elite that it
possesses leisure as the great reward of its elite-hood.
Kalgan was at the service, therefore, successively – and successfully – of the effete and
perfumed dandies of the Imperial Court with their sparkling and libidinous ladies; of the rough
and raucous warlords who ruled in iron the worlds they had gained in blood, with their unbridled
and lascivious wenches; of the plump and luxurious businessmen of the Foundation, with their
lush and flagitious mistresses.
It was quite undiscriminating, since they all had money. And since Kalgan serviced all and
barred none; since its commodity was in unfailing demand; since it had the wisdom to interfere
in no world's politics, to stand on no one's legitimacy, it prospered when nothing else did, and
remained fat when all grew thin.
That is, until the Mule. Then, somehow, it fell, too, before a conqueror who was impervious to
amusement, or to anything but conquest. To him all planets were alike, even Kalgan.
So for a decade, Kalgan found itself in the strange role of Galactic metropolis; mistress of the
greatest Empire since the end of the Galactic Empire itself.
And then, with the death of the Mule, as sudden as the zoom, came the drop. The Foundation
broke away. With it and after it, much of the rest of the Mule's dominions. Fifty years later there
was left only the bewildering memory of that short space of power, like an opium dream. Kalgan
never quite recovered. It could never return to the unconcerned pleasure world it had been, for
the spell of power never quite releases its bold. It lived instead under a succession of men
whom the Foundation called the Lords of Kalgan, but who styled themselves First Citizen of the
Galaxy, in imitation of the Mule's only title, and who maintained the fiction that they were
conquerors too.
The current Lord of Kalgan had held that position for five months. He had gained it originally by
virtue of his position at the head of the Kalganian navy, and through a lamentable lack of
caution on the part of the previous lord. Yet no one on Kalgan was quite stupid enough to go
into the question of legitimacy too long or too closely. These things happened, and are best
accepted.
Yet that sort of survival of the fittest in addition to putting a premium on bloodiness and evil,
occasionally allowed capability to come to the fore as well. Lord Stettin was competent enough
and not easy to manage.
Not easy for his eminence, the First Minister, who, with fine impartiality, had served the last lord
as well as the present; and who would, if he lived long enough, serve the next as honestly.
Nor easy for the Lady Callia, who was Stettin's more than friend, yet less than wife.
In Lord Stettin's private apartments the three were alone that evening. The First Citizen, bulky
and glistening in the admiral's uniform that he affected, scowled from out the unupholstered
chair in which he sat as stiffly as the plastic of which it was composed. His First Minister Lev
Meirus, faced him with a far-off unconcern, his long, nervous fingers stroking absently and
rhythmically the deep line that curved from hooked nose along gaunt and sunken cheek to the
point, nearly, of the gray-bearded chin. The Lady Callia disposed of herself gracefully on the
deeply furred covering of a foamite couch, her full lips trembling a bit in an unheeded pout.
"Sir," said Meirus – it was the only title adhering to a lord who was styled only First Citizen, "you
lack a certain view of the continuity of history. Your own life, with its tremendous revolutions,
leads you to think of the course of civilization as something equally amenable to sudden
change. But it is not."
"The Mule showed otherwise."
"But who can follow in his footsteps. He was more than man, remember. And be, too, was not
entirely successful."
"Poochie," whimpered the Lady Callia, suddenly, and then shrank into herself at the furious
gesture from the First Citizen.
Lord Stettin said, harshly, "Do not interrupt, Callia. Meirus, I am tired of inaction. My
predecessor spent his life polishing the navy into a finely-turned instrument that has not its
equal in the Galaxy. And he died with the magnificent machine lying idle. Am I to continue that?
I, an Admiral of the Navy?
"How long before the machine rusts? At present, it is a drain on the Treasury and returns
nothing. Its officers long for dominion, its men for loot. All Kalgan desires the return of Empire
and glory. Are you capable of understanding that?"
"These are but words that you use, but I grasp your meaning. Dominion, loot, glory – pleasant
when they are obtained, but the process of obtaining them is often risky and always
unpleasant. The first fine flush may not last. And in all history, it has never been wise to attack
the Foundation. Even the Mule would have been wiser to refrain–"
There were tears in the Lady Callia's blue, empty eyes. Of late, Poochie scarcely saw her, and
now, when he had promised the evening to her, this horrible, thin, gray man, who always
looked through her rather than at her, had forced his way in. And Poochie let him. She dared
not say anything; was frightened even of the sob that forced its way out.
But Stettin was speaking now in the voice she hated, hard and Impatient. He was saying:
"You're a slave to the far past. The Foundation is greater in volume and population, but they
are loosely knit and will fall apart at a blow. What holds them together these days is merely
inertia; an inertia I am strong enough to smash. You are hypnotized by the old days when only
the Foundation had atomic power. They were able to dodge the last hammer blows of the dying
Empire and then faced only the unbrained anarchy of the warlords who would counter the
Foundation's atomic vessels only with hulks and relics.
"But the Mule, my dear Meirus, has changed that. He spread the knowledge, that the
Foundation had hoarded to itself, through half the Galaxy and the monopoly in science is gone
forever. We can match them."
"And the Second Foundation?" questioned Meirus, coolly.
"And the Second Foundation?" repeated Stettin as coolly. "Do you know its intentions? It took
ten years to stop the Mule, if, indeed, it was the factor, which some doubt. Are you unaware
that a good many of the Foundation's psychologists and sociologists are of the opinion that the
Seldon Plan has been completely disrupted since the days of the Mule? If the Plan has gone,
then a vacuum exists which I may fill as well as the next man."
"Our knowledge of these matters is not great enough to warrant the gamble."
"Our knowledge, perhaps, but we have a Foundation visitor on the planet. Did you know that? A
Homir Munn – who, I understand, has written articles on the Mule, and has expressed exactly
that opinion, that the Seldon Plan no longer exists."
The First Minister nodded, "I have heard of him, or at least of his writings. What does he
desire?"
"He asks permission to enter the Mule's palace."
"Indeed? It would be wise to refuse. It is never advisable to disturb the superstitions with which
a planet is held."
"I will consider that – and we will speak again."
Meirus bowed himself out.
Lady Callia said tearfully, "Are you angry with me, Poochie?" Stettin turned on her savagely.
"Have I not told you before never to call me by that ridiculous name in the presence of others?"
"You used to like it."
"Well, I don't any more, and it is not to happen again."
He stared at her darkly. It was a mystery to him that he tolerated her these days. She was a
soft, empty-headed thing, comfortable to the touch, with a pliable affection that was a
convenient facet to a hard life. Yet, even that affection was becoming wearisome. She dreamed
of marriage, of being First Lady.
Ridiculous!
She was all very well when he had been an admiral only – but now as First Citizen and future
conqueror, he needed more. He needed heirs who could unite his future dominions, something
the Mule had never had, which was why his Empire did not survive his strange nonhuman life.
He, Stettin, needed someone of the great historic families of the Foundation with whom he
could fuse dynasties.
He wondered testily why he did not rid himself of Callia now. It would be no trouble. She would
whine a bit– He dismissed the thought. She had her points, occasionally.
Callia was cheering up now. The influence of Graybeard was gone and her Poochie's granite
face was softening now. She lifted herself in a single, fluid motion and melted toward him.
"You're not going to scold me, are you?"
"No." He patted her absently. "Now just sit quietly for a while, will you? I want to think."
"About the man from the Foundation?"
"Yes."
"Poochie?" This was a pause.
"What?"
"Poochie, the man has a little girl with him, you said. Remember? Could I see her when she
comes? I never–"
"Now what do you think I want him to bring his brat with him for? Is my audience room to be a
grammar school? Enough of your nonsense, Callia."
"But I’ll take care of her, Poochie. You won't even have to bother with her. It's just that I hardly
ever see children, and you know how I love them."
He looked at her sardonically. She never tired of this approach. She loved children; i.e. his
children; i.e. his legitimate children; i.e. marriage. He laughed.
"This particular little piece," he said, "is a great girl of fourteen or fifteen. She's probably as tall
as you are."
Callia looked crushed. "Well, could I, anyway? She could tell me about the Foundation? I've
always wanted to go there, you know. My grandfather was a Foundation man. Won't you take
me there, sometime, Poochie?"
Stettin smiled at the thought. Perhaps he would, as conqueror. The good nature that the
thought supplied him with made itself felt in his words, "I will, I will. And you can see the girl and
talk Foundation to her all you want. But not near me, understand."
"I won't bother you, honestly. I'll have her in my own rooms." She was happy again. It was not
very often these days that she was allowed to have her way. She put her arms about his neck
and after the slightest hesitation, she felt its tendons relax and the large head come softly down
upon her shoulder.
13
Lady
Arcadia felt triumphant. How life had changed since Pelleas Anthor had stuck his silly face up
against her window – and all because she had the vision and courage to do what needed to be
done.
Here she was on Kalgan. She had been to the great Central Theater – the largest in the Galaxy
– and seen in person some of the singing stars who were famous even in the distant
Foundation. She had shopped all on her own along the Flowered Path, fashion center of the
gayest world in Space. And she had made her own selections because Homir just didn't know
anything about it at all. The saleswomen raised no objections at all to long, shiny dresses with
those vertical sweeps that made her look so tall – and Foundation money went a long, long
way. Homir had given her a ten-credit bill and when she changed it to Kalganian "Kalganids," it
made a terribly thick sheaf.
She had even had her hair redone – sort of half-short in back, with two glistening curls over
each temple. And it was treated so that it looked goldier than ever; it just shone.
But this, this was best of all. To be sure, the Palace of Lord Stettin wasn't as grand and lavish
as the theaters, or as mysterious and historical as the old palace of the Mule – of which, so far
they had only glimpsed the lonely towers in their air flight across the planet – but, imagine, a
real Lord. She was rapt in the glory of it.
And not only that. She was actually face to face with his Mistress. Arcadia capitalized the word
in her mind, because she knew the role such women had played in history; knew their glamour
and power. In fact, she had often thought of being an all-powerful and glittering creature,
herself, but somehow mistresses weren't in fashion at the Foundation just then and besides,
her father probably wouldn't let her, if it came to that.
Of course, the Lady Callia didn't quite come up to Arcadia's notion of the part. For one thing,
she was rather plump, and didn't look at all wicked and dangerous. just sort of faded and
near-sighted. Her voice was high, too, instead of throaty, and–
Callia said, "Would you like more tea, child?"
"I'll have another cup, thank you, your grace," – or was it your highness?
Arcadia continued with a connoisseur's condescension, "Those are lovely pearls you are
wearing, my lady." (On the whole, "my lady" seemed best.)
"Oh? Do you think so?" Callia seemed vaguely pleased. She removed them and let them swing
milkily to and fro. "Would you like them? You can have them, if you like."
"Oh, my– You really mean–" She found them in her hand, then, repelling them mournfully, she
said, "Father wouldn't like it."
"He wouldn't like the pearls? But they're quite nice pearls."
"He wouldn't like my taking them, I mean. You're not supposed to take expensive presents from
other people, he says."
"You aren't? But ... I mean, this was a present to me from Poo ... from the First Citizen. Was
that wrong, do you suppose?"
Arcadia reddened. "I didn't mean--"
But Callia had tired of the subject. She let the pearls slide to the ground and said, "You were
going to tell me about the Foundation. Please do so right now."
And Arcadia was suddenly at a loss. What does one say about a world dull to tears. To her, the
Foundation was a suburban town, a comfortable house, the annoying necessities of education,
the uninteresting eternities of a quiet life. She said, uncertainly, "It's just like you view in the
book-films, I suppose."
"Oh, do you view book-films? They give me such a headache when I try. But do you know I
always love video stories about your Traders – such big, savage men. It's always so exciting. Is
your friend, Mr. Munn, one of them? He doesn't seem nearly savage enough. Most of the
Traders had beards and big bass voices, and were so domineering with women – don't you
think so?"
Arcadia smiled, glassily. "That's just part of history, my lady. I mean, when the Foundation was
Young, the Traders were the pioneers pushing back the frontiers and bringing civilization to the
rest of the Galaxy. We learned all about that in school. But that time has passed. We don't have
Traders any more; just corporations and things."
"Really? What a shame. Then what does Mr. Munn do? I mean, if he's not a Trader."
"Uncle Homir's a librarian."
Callia put a hand to her lips and tittered. "You mean he takes care of book-films. Oh, my! It
seems like such a silly thing for a grown man to do."
"He's a very good librarian, my lady. It is an occupation that is very highly regarded at the
Foundation." She put down the little, iridescent teacup upon the milky-metaled table surface.
Her hostess was all concern. "But my dear child. I'm sure I didn't mean to offend you. He must
be a very intelligent man. I could see it in his eyes as soon as I looked at him. They were so ...
so intelligent. And he must be brave, too, to want to see the Mule's palace."
"Brave?" Arcadia's internal awareness twitched. This was what she was waiting for. Intrigue!
Intrigue! With great indifference, she asked, staring idly at her thumbtip: "Why must one be
brave to wish to see the Mule's palace?"
"Didn't you know?" Her eyes were round, and her voice sank. "There's a curse on it. When he
died, the Mule directed that no one ever enter it until the Empire of the Galaxy is established.
Nobody on Kalgan would dare even to enter the grounds."
Arcadia absorbed that. "But that's superstition–"
"Don't say that," Callia was distressed. "Poochie always says that. He says it's useful to say it
isn't though, in order to maintain his hold over the people. But I notice he's never gone in
himself. And neither did Thallos, who was First Citizen before Poochie." A thought struck her
and she was all curiosity again: "But why does Mr. Munn want to see the Palace?"
And it was here that Arcadia's careful plan could be put into action. She knew well from the
books she had read that a ruler's mistress was the real power behind the throne, that she was
the very well-spring of influence. Therefore, if Uncle Homir failed with Lord Stettin – and she
was sure he would – she must retrieve that failure with Lady Callia. To be sure, Lady Callia was
something of a puzzle. She didn't seem at all bright. But, well, all history proved–
She said, "There's a reason, my lady – but will you keep it in confidence?"
"Cross my heart," said Callia, making the appropriate gesture on the soft, billowing whiteness of
her breast.
Arcadia's thoughts kept a sentence ahead of her words. "Uncle Homir is a great authority on
the Mule, you know. He's written books and books about it, and he thinks that all of Galactic
history has been changed since the Mule conquered the Foundation."
"Oh, my."
"He thinks the Seldon Plan–"
Callia clapped her hands. "I know about the Seldon Plan. The videos about the Traders were
always all about the Seldon Plan. It was supposed to arrange to have the Foundation win all
the time. Science had something to do with it, though I could never quite see how. I always get
so restless when I have to listen to explanations. But you go right ahead, my dear. It's different
when you explain. You make everything seem so clear."
Arcadia continued, "Well, don't you see then that when the Foundation was defeated by the
Mule, the Seldon Plan didn't work and it hasn't worked since. So who will form the Second
Empire?"
"The Second Empire?"
"Yes, one must be formed some day, but how? That's the problem, you see. And there's the
Second Foundation."
"The Second Foundation?" She was quite completely lost.
'Yes, they're the planners of history that are following in the footsteps of Seldon. They stopped
the Mule because he was premature, but now, they may be supporting Kalgan."
"Why?"
"Because Kalgan may now offer the best chance of being the nucleus for a new Empire."
Dimly, Lady Callia seemed to grasp that. "You mean Poochie is going to make a new Empire."
"We can't tell for sure. Uncle Homir thinks so, but hell have to see the Mule's records to find
out."
"It's all very complicated," said Lady Callia, doubtfully.
Arcadia gave up. She had done her best.
Lord Stettin was in a more-or-less savage humor. The session with the milksop from the
Foundation had been quite unrewarding. It had been worse; it had been embarrassing. To be
absolute ruler of twenty-seven worlds, master of the Galaxy's greatest military machine, owner
of the universe's most vaulting ambition – and left to argue nonsense with an antiquarian.
Damnation!
He was to violate the customs of Kalgan, was he? To allow the Mule's palace to be ransacked
so that a fool could write another book? The cause of science! The sacredness of knowledge!
Great Galaxy! Were these catchwords to be thrown in his face in all seriousness? Besides –
and his flesh prickled slightly – there was the matter of the curse. He didn't believe in it; no
intelligent man could. But if he was going to defy it, it would have to be for a better reason than
any the fool had advanced.
"What do you want?" he snapped, and Lady Callia cringed visibly in the doorway.
"Are you busy?"
"Yes. I am busy."
"But there's nobody here, Poochie. Couldn't I even speak to you for a minute?"
"Oh, Galaxy! What do you want? Now hurry."
Her words stumbled. "The little girl told me they were going into the Mule's palace. I thought we
could go with her. It must be gorgeous inside."
"She told you that, did she? Well, she isn't and we aren't. Now go tend your own business. I've
had about enough of you."
"But, Poochie, why not? Aren't you going to let them? The little girl said that you were going to
make an Empire!"
"I don't care what she said– What was that?" He strode to Callia, and caught her firmly above
the elbow, so that his fingers sank deeply into the soft flesh, "What did she tell you?"
"You're hurting me. I can't remember what she said, if you're going to look at me like that."
He released her, and she stood there for a moment, rubbing vainly at the red marks. She
whimpered, "The little girl made me promise not to tell."
"That's too bad. Tell me! Now!"
"Well, she said the Seldon Plan was changed and that there was another Foundation
somewheres that was arranging to have you make an Empire. That's all. She said Mr. Munn
was a very important scientist and that the Mule's palace would have proof of all that. That's
every bit of what she said. Are you angry?"
But Stettin did not answer. He left the room, hurriedly, with Callia's cowlike eyes staring
mournfully after him. Two orders were sent out over the official seal of the First Citizen before
the hour was up. One had the effect of sending five hundred ships of the line into space on
what were officially to be termed as "war games." The other had the effect of throwing a single
man into confusion.
Homir Munn ceased his preparations to leave when that second order reached him. It was, of
course, official permission to enter the palace of the Mule. He read and reread it with anything
but joy.
But Arcadia was delighted. She knew what had happened.
Or, at any rate, she thought she did.
14
Anxiety
Poli placed the breakfast on the table, keeping one eye on the table news-recorder which
quietly disgorged the bulletins of the day. It could be done easily enough without loss of
efficiency, this one-eye-absent business. Since all items of food were sterilely packed in
containers which served as discardable cooking units, her duties vis-a-vis breakfast consisted
of nothing more than choosing the menu, placing the items on the table, and removing the
residue thereafter.
She clacked her tongue at what she saw and moaned softly in retrospect.
"Oh, people are so wicked," she said, and Darell merely hemmed in reply.
Her voice took on the high-pitched rasp which she automatically assumed when about to bewail
the evil of the world. "Now why do these terrible Kalganese" – she accented the second
syIlable and gave it a long "a" – "do like that? You'd think they'd give a body peace. But no, it's
just trouble, trouble, all the time.
"Now look at that headline: 'Mobs Riot Before Foundation Consulate.’ Oh, would I like to give
them a piece of my mind, if I could. That's the trouble with people; they just don't remember.
They just don't remember, Dr. Darell – got no memory at all. Look at the last war after the Mule
died – of course I was just a little girl then – and oh, the fuss and trouble. My own uncle was
killed, him being just in his twenties and only two years married, with a baby girl. I remember
him even yet – blond hair he had, and a dimple in his chin. I have a trimensional cube of him
somewheres–
"And now his baby girl has a son of her own in the navy and most like if anything happens–
"And we had the bombardment patrols, and all the old men taking turns in the stratospheric
defense – I could imagine what they would have been able to do if the Kalganese had come
that far. My mother used to tell us children about the food rationing and the prices and taxes. A
body could hardly make ends meet–
"You'd think if they had sense people would just never want to start it again; just have nothing
to do with it. And I suppose it's not people that do it, either; I suppose even Kalganese would
rather sit at home with their families and not go fooling around in ships and getting killed. It's
that awful man, Stettin. It's a wonder people like that are let live. He kills the old man – what's
his name – Thallos, and now he's just spoiling to be boss of everything.
"And why he wants to fight us, I don't know. He's bound to lose – like they always do. Maybe it's
all in the Plan, but sometimes I'm sure it must be a wicked plan to have so much fighting and
killing in it, though to be sure I haven't a word to say about Hari Seldon, who I'm sure knows
much more about that than I do and perhaps I'm a fool to question him. And the other
Foundation is as much to blame. They could stop Kalgan now and make everything fine. They'll
do it anyway in the end, and you'd think they'd do it before there's any damage done."
Dr. Darell looked up. "Did you say something, Poli?"
Poli's eyes opened wide, then narrowed angrily. "Nothing, doctor, nothing at all. I haven't got a
word to say. A body could as soon choke to death as say a word in this house. It's jump here,
and jump there, but just try to say a word–" and she went off simmering.
Her leaving made as little impression on Darell as did her speaking.
Kalgan! Nonsense! A merely physical enemy! Those had always been beaten!
Yet he could not divorce himself of the current foolish crisis. Seven days earlier, the mayor had
asked him to be Administrator of Research and Development. He had promised an answer
today.
Well–
He stirred uneasily. Why, himself! Yet could he refuse? It would seem strange, and he dared
not seem strange. After all, what did he care about Kalgan. To him there was only one enemy.
Always had been.
While his wife had lived, he was only too glad to shirk the task; to hide. Those long, quiet days
on Trantor, with the ruins of the past about them! The silence of a wrecked world and the
forgetfulness of it all!
But she had died. Less than five years, all told, it had been; and after that he knew that he
could live only by fighting that vague and fearful enemy that deprived him of the dignity of
manhood by controlling his destiny; that made life a miserable struggle against a foreordained
end; that made all the universe a hateful and deadly chess game.
Call it sublimation; he, himself did can it that – but the fight gave meaning to his life.
First to the University of Santanni, where he had joined Dr. Kleise. It had been five years
well-spent.
And yet Kleise was merely a gatherer of data. He could not succeed in the real task – and
when Darell had felt that as certainty, he knew it was time to leave.
Kleise may have worked in secret, yet he had to have men working for him and with him. He
had subjects whose brains he probed. He had a University that backed him. All these were
weaknesses.
Kleise could not understand that; and he, Darell, could not explain that. They parted enemies. It
was well; they had to. He had to leave in surrender – in case someone watched.
Where Kleise worked with charts; Darell worked with mathematical concepts in the recesses of
his mind. Kleise worked with many; Darell with none. Kleise in a University; Darell in the quiet
of a suburban house.
And he was almost there.
A Second Foundationer is not human as far as his cerebrum is concerned. The cleverest
physiologist, the most subtle neurochemist might detect nothing – yet the difference must be
there.
And since the difference was one of the mind, it was there that it must be detectable.
Given a man like the Mule – and there was no doubt that the Second Foundationers had the
Mule's powers, whether inborn or acquired – with the power of detecting and controlling human
emotions, deduce from that the electronic circuit required, and deduce from that the last details
of the encephalograph on which it could not help but be betrayed.
And now Kleise had returned into his life, in the person of his ardent young pupil, Anthor.
Folly! Folly! With his graphs and charts of people who had been tampered with. He had learned
to detect that years ago, but of what use was it. He wanted the arm; not the tool. Yet he had to
agree to join Anthor, since it was the quieter course.
Just as now he would become Administrator of Research and Development. It was the quieter
course! And so he remained a conspiracy within a conspiracy.
The thought of Arcadia teased him for a moment, and he shuddered away from it. Left to
himself, it would never have happened. Left to himself, no one would ever have been
endangered but himself. Left to himself–
He felt the anger rising-against the dead Kleise, the living Anthor, all the well-meaning fools–
Well, she could take care of herself. She was a very mature little girl.
She could take care of herself!
It was a whisper in his mind–
Yet could she?
At the moment, that Dr. Darell told himself mournfully that she could, she was sitting in the
coldly austere anteroom of the Executive Offices of the First Citizen of the Galaxy. For half an
hour she had been sitting there, her eyes sliding slowly about the walls. There had been two
armed guards at the door when she had entered with Homir Munn. They hadn't been there the
other times.
She was alone, now, yet she sensed the unfriendliness of the very furnishings of the room. And
for the first time.
Now, why should that be?
Homir was with Lord Stettin. Well, was that wrong?
It made her furious. In similar situations in the book-films and the videos, the hero foresaw the
conclusion, was prepared for it when it came, and she – she just sat there. Anything could
happen. Anything! And she just sat there.
Well, back again. Think it back. Maybe something would come.
For two weeks, Homir had nearly lived inside the Mule's palace. He had taken her once, with
Stettin's permission. It was large and gloomily massive, shrinking from the touch of life to lie
sleeping within its ringing memories, answering the footsteps with a hollow boom or a savage
clatter. She hadn't liked it.
Better the great, gay highways of the capital city; the theaters and spectacles of a world
essentially poorer than the Foundation, yet spending more of its wealth on display.
Homir would return in the evening, awed–
"It's a dream-world for me," he would whisper. "If I could only chip the palace down stone by
stone, layer by layer of the aluminum sponge. If I could carry it back to Terminus– What a
museum it would make."
He seemed to have lost that early reluctance. He was eager, instead; glowing. Arcadia knew
that by the one sure sign; he practically never stuttered throughout that period.
One time, he said, "There are abstracts of the records of General Pritcher–"
"I know him. He was the Foundation renegade, who combed the Galaxy for the Second
Foundation, wasn't he?"
"Not exactly a renegade, Arkady. The Mule had Converted him."
"Oh, it's the same thing."
"Galaxy, that combing you speak of was a hopeless task. The original records of the Seldon
Convention that established both Foundations five hundred years ago, make only one
reference to the Second Foundation. They say if's located 'at the other end of the Galaxy at
Star's End.' That's all the Mule and Pritcher had to go on. They had no method of recognizing
the Second Foundation even if they found it. What madness!
"They have records" – he was speaking to himself, but Arcadia listened eagerly – "which must
cover nearly a thousand worlds, yet the number of worlds available for study must have been
closer to a million. And we are no better off–"
Arcadia broke in anxiously, "Shhh-h" in a tight hiss.
Homir froze, and slowly recovered. "Let's not talk," he mumbled.
And now Homir was with Lord Stettin and Arcadia waited outside alone and felt the blood
squeezing out of her heart for no reason at all. That was more frightening than anything else.
That there seemed no reason.
On the other side of the door, Homir, too, was living in a sea of gelatin. He was fighting, with
furious intensity, to keep from stuttering and, of course, could scarcely speak two consecutive
words clearly as a result.
Lord Stettin was in full uniform, six-feet-six, large-jawed, and hard-mouthed. His balled,
arrogant fists kept a powerful time to his sentences.
"Well, you have had two weeks, and you come to me with tales of nothing. Come, sir, tell me
the worst. Is my Navy to be cut to ribbons? Am I to fight the ghosts of the Second Foundation
as well as the men of the First?"
"I ... I repeat, my lord, I am no p ... pre ... predictor. I ... I am at a complete ... loss."
"Or do you wish to go back to warn your countrymen? To deep Space with your play-acting. I
want the truth or I’ll have it out of you along with half your guts."
"I'm t ... telling only the truth, and I'll have you re ... remember, my l ... lord, that I am a citizen of
the Foundation. Y ... you cannot touch me without harvesting m ... m ... more than you count
on."
The Lord of Kalgan laughed uproariously. "A threat to frighten children. A horror with which to
beat back an idiot. Come, Mr. Munn, I have been patient with you. I have listened to you for
twenty minutes while you detailed wearisome nonsense to me which must have cost you
sleepless nights to compose. It was wasted effort. I know you are here not merely to rake
through the Mule's dead ashes and to warm over the cinders you findyou come here for more
than you have admitted. Is that not true?"
Homir Munn could no more have quenched the burning horror that grew in his eyes than, at
that moment, he could have breathed. Lord Stettin saw that, and clapped the Foundation man
upon his shoulder so that he and the chair he sat on reeled under the impact.
"Good. Now let us be frank. You are investigating the Seldon Plan. You know that it no longer
holds. You know, perhaps, that I am the inevitable winner now; I and my heirs. Well, man, what
matters it who established the Second Empire, so long as it is established. History plays no
favorites, eh? Are you afraid to tell me? You see that I know your mission."
Munn said thickly, "What is it y ... you w ... want?"
"Your presence. I would not wish the Plan spoiled through overconfidence. You understand
more of these things than I do; you can detect small flaws that I might miss. Come, you will be
rewarded in the end; you will have your fair glut of the loot. What can you expect at the
Foundation? To turn the tide of a perhaps inevitable defeat? To lengthen the war? Or is it
merely a patriotic desire to die for your country?"
"I ... I–" He finally spluttered into silence. Not a word would come.
"You will stay," said the Lord of Kalgan, confidently. "You have no choice. Wait" – an almost
forgotten afterthought – "I have information to the effect that your niece is of the family of Bayta
Darell."
Homir uttered a startled: "Yes." He could not trust himself at this point to be capable of weaving
anything but cold truth.
"It is a family of note on the Foundation?"
Homir nodded, "To whom they would certainly b ... brook no harm."
"Harm! Don't be a fool, man; I am meditating the reverse. How old is she?"
"Fourteen."
"Sol Well, not even the Second Foundation, or Hari Seldon, himself, could stop time from
passing or girls from becoming women."
With that, he turned on his heel and strode to a draped door which he threw open violently.
He thundered, "What in Space have you dragged your shivering carcass here for?"
The Lady Callia blinked at him, and said in a small voice, "I didn't know anyone was with you."
"Well, there is. I'll speak to you later of this, but now I want to see your back, and quickly."
Her footsteps were a fading scurry in the corridor.
Stettin returned, "She is a remnant of an interlude that has lasted too long. It will end soon.
Fourteen, you say?"
Homir stared at him with a brand-new horror!
Arcadia started at the noiseless opening of a door – jumping at the jangling sliver of movement
it made in the comer of her eye. The finger that crooked frantically at her met no response for
long moments, and then, as if in response to the cautions enforced by the very sight of that
white, trembling figure, she tiptoed her way across the floor.
Their footsteps were a taut whisper in the corridor. It was the Lady Callia, of course, who held
her hand so tightly that it hurt, and for some reason, she did not mind following her. Of the Lady
Callia, at least, she was not afraid.
Now, why was that?
They were in a boudoir now, all pink fluff and spun sugar. Lady Callia stood with her back
against the door.
She said, "This was our private way to me ... to my room, you know, from his office. His, you
know." And she pointed with a thumb, as though even the thought of him were grinding her soul
to death with fear.
"It's so lucky ... it’s so lucky–" Her pupils had blackened out the blue with their size.
"Can you tell me–" began Arcadia timidly.
And Callia was in frantic motion. "No, child, no. There is no time. Take off your clothes. Please.
Please. I'll get you more, and they won't recognize you."
She was in the closet, throwing useless bits of flummery in reckless heaps upon the ground,
looking madly for something a girl could wear without becoming a living invitation to dalliance.
"Here, this will do. It will have to. Do you have money? Here, take it all – and this." She was
stripping her ears and fingers. "Just go home – go home to your Foundation."
"But Homir ... my uncle." She protested vainly through the muffling folds of the sweet-smelling
and luxurious spun-metal being forced over her head.
"He won't leave. Poochie will hold him forever, but you mustn't stay. Oh, dear, don't you
understand?"
"No." Arcadia forced a standstill, "I don't understand."
Lady Callia squeezed her hands tightly together. "You must go back to warn your people there
will be war. Isn't that clear?" Absolute terror seemed paradoxically to have lent a lucidity to her
thoughts and words that was entirely out of character. "Now come!"
Out another way! Past officials who stared after them, but saw no reason to stop one whom
only the Lord of Kalgan could stop with impunity. Guards clicked heels and presented arms
when they went through doors.
Arcadia breathed only on occasion through the years the trip seemed to take – yet from the first
crooking of the white finger to the time she stood at the outer gate, with people and noise and
traffic in the distance was only twenty-five minutes.
She looked back, with a sudden frightened pity. "I ... I ... don't know why you're doing this, my
lady, but thanks– What's going to happen to Uncle Homir?"
"I don't know," wailed the other. "Can't you leave? Go straight to the spaceport. Don't wait. He
may be looking for you this very minute."
And still Arcadia lingered. She would be leaving Homir; and, belatedly, now that she felt the
free air about her, she was suspicious. "But what do you care if he does?"
Lady Callia bit her lower lip and muttered, "I can't explain to a little girl like you. It would be
improper. Well, you'll be growing up and I ... I met Poochie when I was sixteen. I can't have you
about, you know." There was a half-ashamed hostility in her eyes.
The implications froze Arcadia. She whispered: "What will he do to you when he finds out?"
And she whimpered back: "I don't know," and threw her arm to her head as she left at a
half-run, back along the wide way to the mansion of the Lord of Kalgan.
But for one eternal second, Arcadia still did not move, for in that last moment before Lady Callia
left, Arcadia had seen something. Those frightened, frantic eyes had momentarily – flashingly –
lit up with a cold amusement.
A vast, inhuman amusement.
It was much to see in such a quick flicker of a pair of eyes, but Arcadia had no doubt of what
she saw.
She was running now – running wildly – searching madly for an unoccupied public booth at
which one could press a button for public conveyance.
She was not running from Lord Stettin; not from him or from all the human hounds he could
place at her heels – not from all his twenty-seven worlds rolled into a single gigantic
phenomenon, hallooing at her shadow.
She was running from a single, frail woman who had helped her escape. From a creature who
had loaded her with money and jewels; who had risked her own life to save her. From an entity
she knew, certainly and finally, to be a woman of the Second Foundation.
An air-taxi came to a soft clicking halt in the cradle. The wind of its coming brushed against
Arcadia's face and stirred at the hair beneath the softly-furred hood Callia had given her.
"Where'll it be, lady?"
She fought desperately to low-pitch her voice to make it not that of a child. "How many
spaceports in the city?"
"Two. Which one ya want?"
"Which is closer?"
He stared at her: "Kalgan Central, lady."
"The other one, please. I’ve got the money." She had a twenty-Kalganid note in her hand. The
denomination of the note made little difference to her, but the taxi-man grinned appreciatively.
"Anything ya say, lady. Sky-line cabs take ya anywhere."
She cooled her cheek against the slightly musty upholstery. The lights of the city moved
leisurely below her.
What should she do? What should she do?
It was in that moment that she knew she was a stupid, stupid little girl, away from her father,
and frightened. Her eyes were full of tears, and deep down in her throat, there was a small,
soundless cry that hurt her insides.
She wasn't afraid that Lord Stettin would catch her. Lady Callia would see to that. Lady Callia!
Old, fat, stupid, but she held on to her lord, somehow. Oh, it was clear enough, now. Everything
was clear.
That tea with Callia at which she had been so smart. Clever little Arcadia! Something inside
Arcadia choked and hated itself. That tea had been maneuvered, and then Stettin had probably
been maneuvered so that Homir was allowed to inspect the Palace after all. She, the foolish
Callia, has wanted it so, and arranged to have smart little Arcadia supply a foolproof excuse,
one which would arouse no suspicions in the minds of the victims, and yet involve a minimum
of interference on her part.
Then why was she free? Homir was a prisoner, of course–
Unless–
Unless she went back to the Foundation as a decoy – a decoy to lead others into the hands of
... of them.
So she couldn't return to the Foundation–
"Spaceport, lady." The air-taxi had come to a halt. Strange! She hadn't even noticed.
What a dream-world it was.
"Thanks," she pushed the bill at him without seeing anything and was stumbling out the door,
then running across the springy pavement.
Lights. Unconcerned men and women. Large gleaming bulletin boards, with the moving figures
that followed every single spaceship that arrived and departed.
Where was she going? She didn't care. She only knew that she wasn't going to the Foundation!
Anywhere else at all would suit.
Oh, thank Seldon, for that forgetful moment – that last split-second when Callia wearied of her
act because she had to do only with a child and had let her amusement spring through.
And then something else occurred to Arcadia, something that had been stirring and moving at
the base of her brain ever since the flight began – something that forever killed the fourteen in
her.
And she knew that she must escape.
That above all. Though they located every conspirator on the Foundation; though they caught
her own father; she could not dared not, risk a warning. She could not risk her own life – not in
the slightest – for the entire realm of Terminus. She was the most important person in the
Galaxy. She was the only important person in the Galaxy.
She knew that even as she stood before the ticket-machine and wondered where to go.
Because in all the Galaxy, she and she alone, except for they, themselves, knew the location of
the Second Foundation.
15
Through the Grid
TRANTOR By the middle of the Interregnum, Trantor was a shadow. In the midst of the
colossal ruins, there lived a small community of farmers....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
There is nothing, never has been anything, quite like a busy spaceport on the outskirts of a
capital city of a populous planet. There are the huge machines resting mightily in their cradles.
If you choose your time properly, there is the impressive sight of the sinking giant dropping to
rest or, more hair-raising still, the swiftening departure of a bubble of steel. All processes
involved are nearly noiseless. The motive power is the silent surge of nucleons shifting into
more compact arrangements
In terms of area, ninety-five percent of the port has just been referred to. Square miles are
reserved for the machines, and for the men who serve them and for the calculators that serve
both.
Only five percent of the port is given over to the floods of humanity to whom it is the way station
to all the stars of the Galaxy. It is certain that very few of the anonymous many-headed stop to
consider the technological mesh that knits the spaceways. Perhaps some of them might itch
occasionally at the thought of the thousands of tons represented by the sinking steel that looks
so small off in the distance. One of those cyclopean cylinders could, conceivably, miss the
guiding beam and crash half a mile from its expected landing point – through the glassite roof
of the immense waiting room perhaps – so that only a thin organic vapor and some powdered
phosphates would be left behind to mark the passing of a thousand men.
It could never happen, however, with the safety devices in use; and only the badly neurotic
would consider the possibility for more than a moment.
Then what do they think about? It is not just a crowd, you see. It is a crowd with a purpose.
That purpose hovers over the field and thickens the atmosphere. Lines queue up; parents herd
their children; baggage is maneuvered in precise masses – people are going somewheres.
Consider then the complete psychic isolation of a single unit of this terribly intent mob that does
not know where to go; yet at the same time feels more intensely than any of the others possibly
can, the necessity of going somewheres; anywhere! Or almost anywhere!
Even lacking telepathy or any of the crudely definite methods of mind touching mind, there is a
sufficient clash in atmosphere, in intangible mood, to suffice for despair.
To suffice? To overflow, and drench, and drown.
Arcadia Darell, dressed in borrowed clothes, standing on a borrowed planet in a borrowed
situation of what seemed even to be a borrowed life, wanted earnestly the safety of the womb.
She didn't know that was what she wanted. She only knew that the very openness of the open
world was a great danger. She wanted a closed spot somewhere – somewhere far –
somewhere in an unexplored nook of the universe – where no one would ever look.
And there she was, age fourteen plus, weary enough for eighty plus, frightened enough for five
minus.
What stranger of the hundreds that brushed past her – actually brushed past her, so that she
could feel their touch – was a Second Foundationer? What stranger could not help but instantly
destroy her for her guilty knowledge – her unique knowledge – of knowing where the Second
Foundation was?
And the voice that cut in on her was a thunderclap that iced the scream in her throat into a
voiceless slash.
"Look, miss," it said, irritably, "are you using the ticket machine or are you just standing there?"
It was the first she realized that she was standing in front of a ticket machine. You put a high
denomination bill into the clipper which sank out of sight. You pressed the button below your
destination and a ticket came out together with the correct change as determined by an
electronic scanning device that never made a mistake. It was a very ordinary thing and there is
no cause for anyone to stand before it for five minutes.
Arcadia plunged a two-hundred credit into the clipper, and was suddenly aware of the button
labeled "Trantor." Trantor, dead capital of the dead Empire – the planet on which she was born.
She pressed it in a dream. Nothing happened, except that the red letters flicked on and off,
reading 172.18– 172.18– 172.18–
It was the amount she was short. Another two-hundred credit. The ticket was spit out towards
her. It came loose when she touched it, and the change tumbled out afterward.
She seized it and ran. She felt the man behind her pressing close, anxious for his own chance
at the machine, but she twisted out from before him and did not look behind.
Yet there was nowhere to run. They were all her enemies.
Without quite realizing it, she was watching the gigantic, glowing signs that puffed into the air:
Steffani, Anacreon, Fermus– There was even one that ballooned, Terminus, and she longed for
it, but did not dare–
For a trifling sum, she could have hired a notifier which could have been set for any destination
she cared and which would, when placed in her purse, make itself heard only to her, fifteen
minutes before take-off time. But such devices are for people who are reasonably secure,
however; who can pause to think of them.
And then, attempting to look both ways simultaneously, she ran head-on into a soft abdomen.
She felt the startled outbreath and grunt, and a hand come down on her arm. She writhed
desperately but lacked breath to do more than mew a bit in the back of her throat.
Her captor held her firmly and waited. Slowly, he came into focus for her and she managed to
look at him. He was rather plump and rather short. His hair was white and copious, being
brushed back to give a pompadour effect that looked strangely incongruous above a round and
ruddy face that shrieked its peasant origin.
"What's the matter?" he said finally, with a frank and twinkling curiosity. "You look scared."
"Sorry," muttered Arcadia in a frenzy. "I’ve got to go. Pardon me."
But he disregarded that entirely, and said, "Watch out, little girl. You'll drop your ticket." And he
lifted it from her resistless white fingers and looked at it with every evidence of satisfaction.
"I thought so," he said, and then bawled in bull-like tones, "Mommuh!"
A woman was instantly at his side, somewhat more short, somewhat more round, somewhat
more ruddy. She wound a finger about a stray gray lock to shove it beneath a well-outmoded
hat.
"Pappa," she said, reprovingly, "why do you shout in a crowd like that? People look at you like
you were crazy. Do you think you are on the farm?"
And she smiled sunnily at the unresponsive Arcadia, and added, "He has manners like a bear."
Then, sharply, "Pappa, let go the little girl. What are you doing?"
But Pappa simply waved the ticket at her. "Look," he said, "she's going to Trantor."
Mamma's face was a sudden beam, "You're from Trantor? Let go her arm, I say, Pappa." She
turned the overstuffed valise she was carrying onto its side and forced Arcadia to sit down with
a gentle but unrelenting pressure. "Sit down," she said, "and rest your little feet. It will be no
ship yet for an hour and the benches are crowded with sleeping loafers. You are from Trantor?"
Arcadia drew a deep breath and gave in. Huskily, she said, "I was born there."
And Mamma clapped her hands gleefully, "One month we've been here and till now we met
nobody from home. This is very nice. Your parents–" she looked about vaguely.
"I'm not with my parents," Arcadia said, carefully.
"All alone? A little girl like you?" Mamma was at once a blend of indignation and sympathy,
"How does that come to be?"
"Mamma," Pappa plucked at her sleeve, "let me tell you. There's something wrong. I think she's
frightened." His voice, though obviously intended for a whisper was quite plainly audible to
Arcadia. "She was running – I was watching her – and not looking where she was going. Before
I could step out of the way, she bumped into me. And you know what? I think she's in trouble."
"So shut your mouth, Pappa. Into you, anybody could bump." But she joined Arcadia on the
valise, which creaked wearily under the added weight and put an arm about the girl's trembling
shoulder. "You're running away from somebody, sweetheart? Don't be afraid to tell me. III help
you."
Arcadia looked across at the kind gray eyes of the woman and felt her lips quivering. One part
of her brain was telling her that here were people from Trantor, with whom she could go, who
could help her remain on that planet until she could decide what next to do, where next to go.
And another part of her brain, much the louder, was telling her in jumbled incoherence that she
did not remember her mother, that she was weary to death of fighting the universe, that she
wanted only to curl into a little hall with strong, gentle arms about her, that if her mother had
lived, she might ... she might–
And for the first time that night, she was crying; crying like a little baby, and glad of it; clutching
tightly at the old-fashioned dress and dampening a corner of it thoroughly, while soft arms held
her closely and a gentle hand stroked her curls.
Pappa stood helplessly looking at the pair, fumbling futilely for a handkerchief which, when
produced, was snatched from his hand. Mamma glared an admonition of quietness at him. The
crowds surged about the little group with the true indifference of disconnected crowds
everywhere. They were effectively alone.
Finally, the weeping trickled to a halt, and Arcadia smiled weakly as she dabbed at red eyes
with the borrowed handkerchief. "Golly," she whispered,
"Shh. Shh. Don't talk," said Mamma, fussily, "just sit and rest for a while. Catch your breath.
Then tell us what's wrong, and you'll see, we'll fix it up, and everything will be all right."
Arcadia scrabbled what remained of her wits together. She could not tell them the truth. She
could tell nobody the truth– And yet she was too worn to invent a useful lie.
She said, whisperingly, "I'm better, now."
"Good," said Mamma. "Now tell me why you’re in trouble. You did nothing wrong? Of course,
whatever you did, well help you; but tell us the truth."
"For a friend from Trantor, anything," added Pappa, expansively, "eh, Mamma?"
"Shut your mouth, Pappa," was the response, without rancor.
Arcadia was groping in her purse. That, at least, was still hers, despite the rapid
clothes-changing forced upon her in Lady Callia's apartments. She found what she was looking
for and handed it to Mamma.
"These are my papers," she said, diffidently. It was shiny, synthetic parchment which had been
issued her by the Foundation's ambassador on the day of her arrival and which had been
countersigned by the appropriate Kalganian official. It was large, florid, and impressive.
Mamma looked at it helplessly, and passed it to Pappa who absorbed its contents with an
impressive pursing of the lips.
He said, "You're from the Foundation?"
"Yes. But I was born in Trantor. See it says that–"
"Ah-hah. It looks all right to me. You're named Arcadia, eh? That's a good Trantorian name. But
where's your uncle? It says here you came in the company of Homir Munn, uncle."
"He's been arrested," said Arcadia, drearily.
"Arrested!" – from the two of them at once. "What for?" asked Mamma. "He did something?"
She shook her head. "I don't know. We were just on a visit. Uncle Homir had business with
Lord Stettin but–" She needed no effort to act a shudder. It was there.
Pappa was impressed. "With Lord Stettin. Mm-m-m, your uncle must be a big man."
"I don't know what it was all about, but Lord Stettin wanted me to stay–" She was recalling the
last words of Lady Callia, which had been acted out for her benefit. Since Callia, as she now
knew, was an expert, the story could do for a second time.
She paused, and Mamma said interestedly, "And why you?"
"I'm not sure. He ... he wanted to have dinner with me all alone, but I said no, because I wanted
Uncle Homir along. He looked at me funny and kept holding my shoulder."
Pappa's mouth was a little open, but Mamma was suddenly red and angry. "How old are you,
Arcadia?"
"Fourteen and a half, almost."
Mamma drew a sharp breath and said, "That such people should be let live. The dogs in the
streets are better. You're running from him, dear, is not?"
Arcadia nodded.
Mamma said, "Pappa, go right to Information and find out exactly when the ship to Trantor
comes to berth. Hurry!"
But Pappa took one step and stopped. Loud metallic words were booming overhead, and five
thousand pairs of eyes looked startledly upwards.
"Men and women," it said, with sharp force. "The airport is being searched for a dangerous
fugitive, and it is now surrounded. No one can enter and no one can leave. The search will,
however, be conducted with great speed and no ships will reach or leave berth during the
interval, so you will not miss your ship. I repeat, no one will miss his ship. The grid will descend.
None of you will move outside your square until the grid is removed, as otherwise we will be
forced to use our neuronic whips."
During the minute or less in which the voice dominated the vast dome of the spaceport's
waiting room, Arcadia could not have moved if all the evil in the Galaxy had concentrated itself
into a ball and hurled itself at her.
They could mean only her. It was not even necessary to formulate that idea as a specific
thought. But why–
Callia had engineered her escape. And Callia was of the Second Foundation. Why, then, the
search now? Had Callia failed? Could Callia fail? Or was this part of the plan, the intricacies of
which escaped her?
For a vertiginous moment, she wanted to jump up and shout that she gave up, that she would
go with them, that ... that–
But Mamma's hand was on her wrist. "Quick! "Quick! Well go to the lady's room before they
start."
Arcadia did not understand. She merely followed blindly. They oozed through the crowd, frozen
as it was into clumps, with the voice still booming through its last words.
The grid was descending now, and Pappa, openmouthed, watched it come down. He had
heard of it and read of it, but had never actually been the object of it. It glimmered in the air,
simply a series of cross-hatched and tight radiation-beams that set the air aglow in a harmless
network of flashing light.
It always was so arranged as to descend slowly from above in order that it might represent a
falling net with all the terrific psychological implications of entrapment.
It was at waist-level now, ten feet between glowing lines in each direction. In his own hundred
square feet, Pappa found himself alone, yet the adjoining squares were crowded. He felt
himself conspicuously isolated but knew that to move into the greater anonymity of a group
would have meant crossing one of those glowing lines, stirring an alarm, and bringing down the
neuronic whip.
He waited.
He could make out over the heads of the eerily quiet and waiting mob, the far-off stir that was
the line of policemen covering the vast floor area, lighted square by lighted square.
It was a long time before a uniform stepped into his square and carefully noted its co-ordinates
into an official notebook.
"Papers!"
Pappa handed them over, and they were flipped through in expert fashion.
"You're Preem Palver, native of Trantor, on Kalgan for a month, returning to Trantor. Answer,
yes or no."
"Yes, yes."
"What's your business on Kalgan?"
"I'm trading representative of our farm co-operative. I've been negotiating terms with the
Department of Agriculture on Kalgan.
"Um-m-m. Your wife is with you? Where is she? She is mentioned in your papers."
"Please. My wife is in the–" He pointed.
"Hanto," roared the policeman. Another uniform joined him.
The first one said, dryly, "Another dame in the can, by the Galaxy. The place must be busting
with them. Write down her name." He indicated the entry in the papers which gave it.
"Anyone else with you?"
"My niece."
"She's not mentioned in the papers."
"She came separately."
"Where is she? Never mind, I know. Write down the niece's name, too, Hanto. What's her
name? Write down Arcadia Palver. You stay right here, Palver. We'll take care of the women
before we leave."
Pappa waited interminably. And then, long, long after, Mamma was marching toward him,
Arcadia's hand firmly in hers, the two policemen trailing behind her.
They entered Pappa's square, and one said, "Is this noisy old woman your wife?"
"Yes, sir," said Pappa, placatingly.
"Then you'd better tell her she's liable to get into trouble if she talks the way she does to the
First Citizen's police." He straightened his shoulders angrily. "Is this your niece?"
"Yes, sir."
"I want her papers."
Looking straight at her husband, Mamma slightly, but no less firmly, shook her head.
A short pause, and Pappa said with a weak smile, "I don't think I can do that."
"What do you mean you can't do that?" The policeman thrust out a hard palm. "Hand it over."
"Diplomatic immunity," said Pappa, softly.
"What do you mean?"
"I said I was trading representative of my farm co-operative. I'm accredited to the Kalganian
government as an official foreign representative and my papers prove it. I showed them to you
and now I don't want to be bothered any more."
For a moment, the policeman was taken aback. "I got to see your papers. It's orders."
"You go away," broke in Mamma, suddenly. "When we want you, we'll send for you, you ... you
bum."
The policeman's lips tightened. "Keep your eye on them, Hanto. I'll get the lieutenant."
"Break a leg!" called Mamma after him. Someone laughed, and then choked it off suddenly.
The search was approaching its end. The crowd was growing dangerously restless. Forty-five
minutes had elapsed since the grid had started falling and that is too long for best effects.
Lieutenant Dirige threaded his way hastily, therefore, toward the dense center of the mob.
"Is this the girl?" he asked wearily. He looked at her and she obviously fitted the description. All
this for a child.
He said, "Her papers, if you please?"
Pappa began, "I have already explained–"
"I know what you have explained, and I'm sorry," said the lieutenant, "but I have my orders, and
I can't help them. If you care to make a protest later, you may. Meanwhile, if necessary, I must
use force."
There was a pause, and the lieutenant waited patiently.
Then Pappa said, huskily, "Give me your papers, Arcadia."
Arcadia shook her head in panic, but Pappa nodded his head. "Don't be afraid. Give them to
me."
Helplessly she reached out and let the documents change hands. Pappa fumbled them open
and looked carefully through them, then handed them over. The lieutenant in his turn looked
through them carefully. For a long moment, he raised his eyes to rest them on Arcadia, and
then he closed the booklet with a sharp snap.
"All in order," he said. "All right, men."
He left, and in two minutes, scarcely more, the grid was gone, and the voice above signified a
back-to-normal. The noise of the crowd, suddenly released, rose high.
Arcadia said: "How ... how–"
Pappa said, "Sh-h. Don't say a word. Let's better go to the ship. It should be in the berth soon."
They were on the ship. They had a private stateroom and a table to themselves in the dining
room. Two light-years already separated them from Kalgan, and Arcadia finally dared to broach
the subject again.
She said, "But they were after me, Mr. Palver, and they must have had my description and all
the details. Why did he let me go?"
And Pappa smiled broadly over his roast beef. "Well, Arcadia, child, it was easy. When you've
been dealing with agents and buyers and competing co-operatives, you learn some of the
tricks. I've had twenty years or more to learn them in. You see, child, when the lieutenant
opened your papers, he found a five hundred credit bill inside, folded up small. Simple, no?"
"I’ll pay you back– Honest, I've got lots of money."
"Well," Pappa's broad face broke into an embarrassed smile, as he waved it away. "For a
country-woman–"
Arcadia desisted. "But what if he'd taken the money and turned me in anyway. And accused me
of bribery."
"And give up five hundred credits? I know these people better than you do, girl."
But Arcadia knew that he did not know people better. Not these people. In her bed that night,
she considered carefully, and knew that no bribe would have stopped a police lieutenant in the
matter of catching her unless that had been planned. They didn't want to catch her, yet had
made every motion of doing so, nevertheless.
Why? To make sure she left? And for Trantor? Were the obtuse and soft-hearted couple she
was with now only a pair of tools in the hands of the Second Foundation, as helpless as she
herself?
They must be!
Or were they?
It was all so useless. How could she fight them. Whatever she did, it might only be what those
terrible omnipotents wanted her to do.
Yet she had to outwit them. Had to. Had to! Had to!!
16
Beginning of War
For reason or reasons unknown to members of the Galaxy at the time of the era under
discussion, Intergalactic Standard Time defines its fundamental unit, the second, as the time in
which light travels 299,776 kilometers. 86,400 seconds are arbitrarily set equal to one
Intergalactic Standard Day; and 365 of these days to one Intergalactic Standard Year.
Why 299,776?– Or 86,400?– Or 365?
Tradition, says the historian, begging the question. Because of certain and various mysterious
numerical relationships, say the mystics, cultists, numerologists, metaphysicists. Because the
original home-planet of humanity had certain natural periods of rotation and revolution from
which those relationships could be derived, say a very few.
No one really knew.
Nevertheless, the date on which the Foundation cruiser, the Hober Mallow met the Kalganian
squadron, headed by the Fearless, and, upon refusing to allow a search party to board, was
blasted into smoldering wreckage was 185; 11692 G.E. That is, it was the 185th day of the
11,692nd year of the Galactic Era which dated from the accession of the first Emperor of the
traditional Kamble dynasty. It was also 185; 419 A.S. – dating from the birth of Seldon – or 185;
348 Y.F. – dating from the establishment of the Foundation. On Kalgan it was 185; 56 F.C. –
dating from the establishment of the First Citizenship by the Mule. In each case, of course, for
convenience, the year was so arranged as to yield the same day number regardless of the
actual day upon which the era began.
And, in addition, to all the millions of worlds of the Galaxy, there were millions of local times,
based on the motions of their own particular heavenly neighbors.
But whichever you choose: 185; 11692-419-348-56 – or anything – it was this day which
historians later pointed to when they spoke of the start of the Stettinian war.
Yet to Dr. Darell, it was none of these at all. It was simply and quite precisely the thirty-second
day since Arcadia had left Terminus.
What it cost Darell to maintain stolidity through these days was not obvious to everyone.
But Elvett Semic thought he could guess. He was an old man and fond of saying that his
neuronic sheaths had calcified to the point where his thinking processes were stiff and
unwieldy. He invited and almost welcomed the universal underestimation of his decaying
powers by being the first to laugh at them. But his eyes were none the less seeing for being
faded; his mind none the less experienced and wise, for being no longer agile.
He merely twisted his pinched lips and said, "Why don't you do something about it?"
The sound was a physical jar to Darell, under which he winced. He said, gruffly, "Where were
we?"
Semic regarded him with grave eyes. "You'd better do something about the girl." His sparse,
yellow teeth showed in a mouth that was open in inquiry.
But Darell replied coldly, "The question is: Can you get a Symes-Molff Resonator in the range
required?"
Well, I said I could and you weren't listening–"
"I'm sorry, Elvett. It's like this. What we're doing now can be more important to everyone in the
Galaxy than the question of whether Arcadia is safe. At least, to everyone but Arcadia and
myself, and I'm willing to go along with the majority. How big would the Resonator be?"
Semic looked doubtful, "I don't know. You can find it somewheres in the catalogues."
"About how big. A ton? A pound? A block long?"
"Oh, I thought you meant exactly. It's a little jigger." He indicated the first joint of his thumb.
"About that."
"All right, can you do something like this?" He sketched rapidly on the pad he held in his lap,
then passed it over to the old physicist, who peered at it doubtfully, then chuckled.
"Y'know, the brain gets calcified when you get as old as I am. What are you trying to do?"
Darell hesitated. He longed desperately, at the moment, for the physical knowledge locked in
the other's brain, so that he need not put his thought into words. But the longing was useless,
and he explained.
Semic was shaking his head. "You'd need hyper-relays. The only things that would work fast
enough. A thundering lot of them."
"But it can be built?"
"Well, sure."
"Can you get all the parts? I mean, without causing comment? In line with your general work."
Semic lifted his upper lip. "Can't get fifty hyper-relays? I wouldn't use that many in my whole
life."
"We're on a defense project, now. Can't you think of something harmless that would use them?
We've got the money."
"Hm-m-m. Maybe I can think of something."
"How small can you make the whole gadget?"
"Hyper-relays can be had micro-size ... wiring ... tubes – Space, you've got a few hundred
circuits there."
"I know. How big?"
Semic indicated with his hands.
"Too big," said Darell. "I've got to swing it from my belt"
Slowly, he was crumpling his sketch into a tight ball. When it was a hard, yellow grape, he
dropped it into the ash tray and it was gone with the tiny white flare of molecular decomposition.
He said, "Who's at your door?"
Semic leaned over his desk to the little milky screen above the door signal. He said, "The
young fellow, Anthor. Someone with him, too."
Darell scraped his chair back. "Nothing about this, Semic, to the others yet. It's deadly
knowledge, if they find out, and two lives are enough to risk."
Pelleas Anthor was a pulsing vortex of activity in Semic's office, which, somehow, managed to
partake of the age of its occupant. In the slow turgor of the quiet room, the loose, summery
sleeves of Anthor's tunic seemed still a-quiver with the outer breezes.
He said, "Dr. Darell, Dr. Semic – Orum Dirige."
The other man was tall. A long straight nose that lent his thin face a saturnine appearance. Dr.
Darell held out a hand.
Anthor smiled slightly. "Police Lieutenant Dirige," he amplified. Then, significantly, "Of Kalgan."
And Darell turned to stare with force at the young man. "Police Lieutenant Dirige of Kalgan," he
repeated, distinctly. "And you bring him here. Why?"
"Because he was the last man on Kalgan to see your daughter. Hold, man."
Anthor's look of triumph was suddenly one of concern, and he was between the two, struggling
violently with Darell. Slowly, and not gently, he forced the older man back into the chair.
"What are you trying to do?" Anthor brushed a lock of brown hair from his forehead, tossed a
hip lightly upon the desk, and swung a leg, thoughtfully. "I thought I was bringing you good
news."
Darell addressed the policeman directly, "What does he mean by calling you the last man to
see my daughter? Is my daughter dead? Please tell me without preliminary." His face was
white with apprehension.
Lieutenant Dirige said expressionlessly, "‘Last man on Kalgan' was the phrase. She's not on
Kalgan now. I have no knowledge past that."
"Here," broke in Anthor, "let me put it straight. Sorry if I overplayed the drama a bit, Doc. You're
so inhuman about this, I forget you have feelings. In the first place, Lieutenant Dirige is one of
us. He was born on Kalgan, but his father was a Foundation man brought to that planet in the
service of the Mule. I answer for the lieutenant's loyalty to the Foundation.
"Now I was in touch with him the day after we stopped getting the daily report from Munn–"
"Why?" broke in Darell, fiercely. "I thought it was quite decided that we were not to make a
move in the matter. You were risking their lives and ours."
"Because," was the equally fierce retort, "I've been involved in this game for longer than you.
Because I know of certain contacts on Kalgan of which you know nothing. Because I act from
deeper knowledge, do you understand?"
"I think you're completely mad."
"Will you listen?"
A pause, and Darell's eyes dropped.
Anthor's lips quirked into a half smile, "All right, Doc. Give me a few minutes. Tell him, Dirige."
Dirige spoke easily: "As far as I know, Dr. Darell, your daughter is at Trantor. At least, she had
a ticket to Trantor at the Eastern Spaceport. She was with a Trading Representative from that
planet who claimed she was his niece. Your daughter seems to have a queer collection of
relatives, doctor. That was the second uncle she had in a period of two weeks, eh? The
Trantorian even tried to bribe me – probably thinks that's why they got away." He smiled grimly
at the thought.
"How was she?"
"Unharmed, as far as I could see. Frightened. I don't blame her for that. The whole department
was after her. I still don't know why."
Darell drew a breath for what seemed the first time in several minutes. He was conscious of the
trembling of his hands and controlled them with an effort. "Then she's all right. This Trading
Representative, who was he? Go back to him. What part does he play in it?"
"I don't know. Do you know anything about Trantor?"
"I lived there once."
"It's an agricultural world, now. Exports animal fodder and grains, mostly. High quality! They sell
them all over the Galaxy. There are a dozen or two farm co-operatives on the planet and each
has its representatives overseas. Shrewd sons of guns, too– I knew this one's record. He'd
been on Kalgan before, usually with his wife. Perfectly honest. Perfectly harmless."
"Um-m-m," said Anthor. "Arcadia was born in Trantor, wasn't she, Doc?"
Darell nodded.
"It hangs together, you see. She wanted to go away – quickly and far – and Trantor would
suggest itself. Don't you think so?"
Darell said: "Why not back here?"
"Perhaps she was being pursued and felt that she had to double off in a new angle, eh?'
Dr. Darell lacked the heart to question further. Well, then, let her be safe on Trantor, or as safe
as one could be anywhere in this dark and horrible Galaxy. He groped toward the door, felt
Anthor's light touch on his sleeve, and stopped, but did not turn.
"Mind if I go home with you, Doc?"
"You're welcome," was the automatic response.
By evening, the exteriormost reaches of Dr. Darell's personality, the ones that made immediate
contact with other people had solidified once more. He had refused to eat his evening meal and
had, instead, with feverish insistence, returned to the inchwise advance into the intricate
mathematics of encephalographic analysis.
It was not till nearly midnight, that he entered the living room again.
Pelleas Anthor was still there, twiddling at the controls of the video. The footsteps behind him
caused him to glance over his shoulder.
"Hi. Aren't you in bed yet? I've been spending hours on the video, trying to get something other
than bulletins. It seems the F.S. Hober Mallow is delayed in course and hasn't been heard
from"
"Really? What do they suspect?"
"What do you think? Kalganian skulduggery. There are reports that Kalganian vessels were
sighted in the general space sector in which the Hober Mallow was last heard from?"
Darell shrugged, and Anthor rubbed his forehead doubtfully.
"Look doc," he said, "why don't you go to Trantor?"
"Why should I?"
"Because "You're no good to us here. You're not yourself. You can't be. And you could
accomplish a purpose by going to Trantor, too. The old Imperial Library with the complete
records of the Proceedings of the Seldon Commission are there–"
"No! The Library has been picked clean and it hasn't helped anyone."
"It helped Ebling Mis once."
"How do you know? Yes, he said he found the Second Foundation, and my mother killed him
five seconds later as the only way to keep him from unwittingly revealing its location to the
Mule. But in doing so, she also, you realize, made it impossible ever to tell whether Mis really
did know the location. After all, no one else has ever been able to deduce the truth from those
records."
"Ebling Mis, if you'll remember, was working under the driving impetus of the Mule's mind."
"I know that, too, but Mis' mind was, by that very token, in an abnormal state. Do you and I
know anything about the properties of a mind under the emotional control of another; about its
abilities and shortcomings? In any case, I will not go to Trantor."
Anthor frowned, "Well, why the vehemence? I merely suggested it as – well, by Space, I don't
understand you. You look ten years older. You're obviously having a hellish time of it. You're
not doing anything of value here. If I were you, I'd go and get the girl."
"Exactly! It's what I want to do, too. That's why I won't do it. Look, Anthor, and try to understand.
You're playing – we're both playing – with something completely beyond our powers to fight. In
cold blood, if you have any, you know that, whatever you may think in your moments of
quixoticism.
"For fifty years, we've known that the Second Foundation is the real descendent and pupil of
Seldonian mathematics. What that means, and you know that, too, is that nothing in the Galaxy
happens which does not play a part in their reckoning. To us, all life is a series of accidents, to
be met with by improvisations To them, all life is purposive and should be met by
precalculation.
"But they have their weakness. Their work is statistical and only the mass action of humanity is
truly inevitable. Now how I play a part, as an individual, in the foreseen course of history, I don't
know. Perhaps I have no definite part, since the Plan leaves individuals to indeterminacy and
free will. But I am important and they – they, you understand – may at least have calculated my
probable reaction. So I distrust, my impulses, my desires, my probable reactions.
"I would rather present them with an improbable reaction. I will stay here, despite the fact that I
yearn very desperately to leave. "No! Because I yearn very desperately to leave."
The younger man smiled sourly. "You don't know your own mind as well as they might.
Suppose that – knowing you – they might count on what you think, merely think, is the
improbable reaction, simply by knowing in advance what your line of reasoning would be."
"In that case, there is no escape. For if I follow the reasoning you have just outlined and go to
Trantor, they may have foreseen that, too. There is an endless cycle of
double-double-double-double-crosses. No matter how far I follow that cycle, I can only either go
or stay. The intricate act of luring my daughter halfway across the Galaxy cannot be meant to
make me stay where I am, since I would most certainly have stayed if they had done nothing. It
can only be to make me move, and so I will stay.
"And besides, Anthor, not everything bears the breath of the Second Foundation; not all events
are the results of their puppeting. They may have had nothing to do with Arcadia's leave-taking,
and she may be safe on Trantor when all the rest of us are dead."
"No," said Anthor, sharply, "now you are off the track."
"You have an alternative interpretation?"
"I have – if you’ll listen."
"Oh, go ahead. I don't lack patience."
"Well, then – how well do you know your own daughter?"
"How well can any individual know any other? Obviously, my knowledge is inadequate."
"So is mine on that basis, perhaps even more so – but at least, I viewed her with fresh eyes.
Item one: She is a ferocious little romantic, the only child of an ivory-tower academician,
growing up in an unreal world of video and book-film adventure. She lives in a weird
self-constructed fantasy of espionage and intrigue. Item two: She's intelligent about it; intelligent
enough to outwit us, at any rate. She planned carefully to overhear our first conference and
succeeded. She planned carefully to go to Kalgan with Munn and succeeded. Item three: She
has an unholy hero-worship of her grandmother – your mother – who defeated the Mule.
"I'm right so far, I think? All right, then. Now, unlike you, I've received a complete report from
Lieutenant Dirige and, in addition, my sources of information on Kalgan are rather complete,
and all sources check. We know, for instance, that Homir Munn, in conference with the Lord of
Kalgan was refused admission to the Mule's Palace, and that this refusal was suddenly
abrogated after Arcadia had spoken to Lady Callia, the First Citizen's very good friend."
Darell interrupted. "And how do you know all this?"
"For one thing, Munn was interviewed by Dirige as part of the police campaign to locate
Arcadia. Naturally, we have a complete transcript of the questions and answers.
"And take Lady Callia herself. It is rumored that she has lost Stettin's interest, but the rumor
isn't borne out by facts. She not only remains unreplaced; is not only able to mediate the lord's
refusal to Munn into an acceptance; but can even engineer Arcadia's escape openly. Why, a
dozen of the soldiers about Stettin's executive mansion testified that they were seen together
on the last evening. Yet she remains unpunished. This despite the fact that Arcadia was
searched for with every appearance of diligence."
"But what is your conclusion from all this torrent of ill-connection?"
"That Arcadia's escape was arranged."
"As I said."
"With this addition. That Arcadia must have known it was arranged; that Arcadia, the bright little
girl who saw cabals everywhere, saw this one and followed your own type of reasoning. They
wanted her to return to the Foundation, and so she went to Trantor, instead. But why Trantor?"
"Well, why?"
"Because that is where Bayta, her idolized grandmother, escaped when she was in flight.
Consciously or unconsciously, Arcadia imitated that. I wonder, then, if Arcadia was fleeing the
same enemy."
"The Mule?" asked Darell with polite sarcasm.
"Of course not. I mean, by the enemy, a mentality that she could not fight. She was running
from the Second Foundation, or such influence thereof as could be found on Kalgan."
"What influence is this you speak of?"
"Do you expect Kalgan to be immune from that ubiquitous menace? We both have come to the
conclusion, somehow, that Arcadia's escape was arranged. Right? She was searched for and
found, but deliberately allowed to slip away by Dirige. By Dirige, do you understand? But how
was that? Because he was our man. But how did they know that? Were they counting on him to
be a traitor? Eh, doc?"
"Now you're saying that they honestly meant to recapture her. Frankly, you're tiring me a bit,
Anthor. Finish your say; I want to go to bed."
"My say is quickly finished." Anthor reached for a small group of photo-records in his inner
pocket. It was the familiar wigglings of the encephalograph. "Dirige's brainwaves," Anthor said,
casually, "taken since he returned."
It was quite visible to Darell's naked eye, and his face was gray when he looked up. "He is
Controlled."
"Exactly. He allowed Arcadia to escape not because he was our man but because he was the
Second Foundation's."
"Even after he knew she was going to Trantor, and not to Terminus."
Anthor shrugged. "He had been geared to let her go. There was no way he could modify that.
He was only a tool, you see. It was just that Arcadia followed the least probable course, and is
probably safe. Or at least safe until such time as the Second Foundation can modify the plans
to take into account this changed state of affairs–"
He paused. The little signal light on the video set was flashing. On an independent circuit, it
signified the presence of emergency news. Darell saw it, too, and with the mechanical
movement of long habit turned on the video. They broke in upon the middle of a sentence but
before its completion, they knew that the Hober Mallow, or the wreck thereof, had been found
and that, for the first time in nearly half a century, the Foundation was again at war.
Anthor's jaw was set in a hard line. "All right, doc, you heard that. Kalgan has attacked; and
Kalgan is under the control of the Second Foundation. Will you follow your daughter's lead and
move to Trantor?"
"No. I will risk it. Here."
"Dr. Darell. You are not as intelligent as your daughter. I wonder how far you can be trusted."
His long level stare held Darell for a moment, and then without a word, he left.
And Darell was left in uncertainty and – almost – despair.
Unheeded, the video was a medley of excited sight-sound, as it described in nervous detail the
first hour of the war between Kalgan and the Foundation.
17
War
The mayor of the Foundation brushed futilely at the picket fence of hair that rimmed his skull.
He sighed. "The years that we have wasted; the chances we have thrown away. I make no
recriminations, Dr. Darell, but we deserve defeat."
Darell said, quietly, "I see no reason for lack of confidence in events, sir."
"Lack of confidence! Lack of confidence! By the Galaxy, Dr. Darell, on what would you base
any other attitude? Come here–"
He half-led half-forced Darell toward the limpid ovoid cradled gracefully on its tiny force-field
support. At a touch of the mayor's hand, it glowed within – an accurate three-dimensional
model of the Galactic double-spiral.
"In yellow," said the mayor, excitedly, "we have that region of Space under Foundation control;
in red, that under Kalgan."
What Darell saw was a crimson sphere resting within a stretching yellow fist that surrounded it
on all sides but that toward the center of the Galaxy.
"Galactography," said the mayor, "is our greatest enemy. Our admirals make no secret of our
almost hopeless, strategic position. Observe. The enemy has inner lines of communication. He
is concentrated; can meet us on all sides with equal ease. He can defend himself with minimum
force.
"We are expanded. The average distance between inhabited systems within the Foundation is
nearly three times that within Kalgan. To go from Santanni to Locris, for instance, is a voyage of
twenty-five hundred parsecs for us, but only eight hundred parsecs for them, if we remain within
our respective territories–"
Darell said, "I understand all that, sir."
"And you do not understand that it may mean defeat."
"There is more than distance to war. I say we cannot lose. It is quite impossible."
"And why do you say that?"
"Because of my own interpretation of the Seldon Plan."
"Oh," the mayor's lips twisted, and the hands behind his back flapped one within the other,
"then you rely, too, on the mystical help of the Second Foundation."
"No. Merely on the help of inevitability – and of courage and persistence."
And yet behind his easy confidence, he wondered–
What if–
Well– What if Anthor were right, and Kalgan were a direct tool of the mental wizards. What if it
was their purpose to defeat and destroy the Foundation. No! It made no sense!
And yet–
He smiled bitterly. Always the same. Always that peering and peering through the opaque
granite which, to the enemy, was so transparent.
Nor were the galactographic verities of the situation lost upon Stettin.
The Lord of Kalgan stood before a twin of the Galactic model which the mayor and Darell had
inspected. Except that where the mayor frowned, Stettin smiled.
His admiral's uniform glistered imposingly upon his massive figure. The crimson sash of the
Order of the Mule awarded him by the former First Citizen whom six months later he had
replaced somewhat forcefully, spanned his chest diagonally from right shoulder to waist. The
Silver Star with Double Comets and Swords sparkled brilliantly upon his left shoulder.
He addressed the six men of his general staff whose uniforms were only less grandiloquent
than his own, and his First Minister as well, thin and gray – a darkling cobweb, lost in the
brightness.
Stettin said, "I think the decisions are clear. We can afford to wait. To them, every day of delay
will be another blow at their morale. If they attempt to defend all portions of their realm, they will
be spread thin and we can strike through in two simultaneous thrusts here and here." He
indicated the directions on the Galactic model – two lances of pure white shooting through the
yellow fist from the red ball it inclosed, cutting Terminus off on either side in a tight arc. "In such
a manner, we cut their fleet into three parts which can be defeated in detail. If they concentrate,
they give up two-thirds of their dominions voluntarily and will probably risk rebellion."
The First Minister's thin voice alone seeped through the hush that followed. "In six months," he
said, "the Foundation will grow six months stronger. Their resources are greater, as we all
know, their navy is numerically stronger; their manpower is virtually inexhaustible. Perhaps a
quick thrust would be safer."
His was easily the least influential voice in the room. Lord Stettin smiled and made a flat
gesture with his hand. "The six months – or a year, if necessary – will cost us nothing. The men
of the Foundation cannot prepare; they are ideologically incapable of it. It is in their very
philosophy to believe that the Second Foundation will save them. But not this time, eh?"
The men in the room stirred uneasily.
"You lack confidence, I believe," said Stettin, frigidly. "Is it necessary once again to describe the
reports of our agents in Foundation territory, or to repeat the findings of Mr. Homir Munn, the
Foundation agent now in our ... uh ... service? Let us adjourn, gentlemen."
Stettin returned to his private chambers with a fixed smile still on his face. He sometimes
wondered about this Homir Munn. A queer water-spined fellow who certainly did not bear out
his early promise. And yet he crawled with interesting information that carried conviction with it
– particularly when Callia was present.
His smile broadened. That fat fool had her uses, after all. At least, she got more with her
wheedling out of Munn than he could, and with less trouble. Why not give her to Munn? He
frowned. Callia. She and her stupid jealousy. Space! If he still had the Darell girl- Why hadn't he
ground her skull to powder for that?
He couldn't quite put his finger on the reason.
Maybe because she got along with Munn. And he needed Munn. It was Munn, for instance,
who had demonstrated that, at least in the belief of the Mule, there was no Second Foundation.
His admirals needed that assurance.
He would have liked to make the proofs public, but it was better to let the Foundation believe in
their nonexistent help. Was it actually Callia who had pointed that out? That's right. She had
said–
Oh, nonsense! She couldn't have said anything.
And yet–
He shook his head to clear it and passed on.
18
Ghost of a World
Trantor was a world in dregs and rebirth. Set like a faded jewel in the midst of the bewildering
crowd of suns at the center of the Galaxy – in the heaps and clusters of stars piled high with
aimless prodigality – it alternately dreamed of past and future.
Time had been when the insubstantial ribbons of control had stretched out from its metal
coating to the very edges of stardom. It had been a single city, housing four hundred billion
administrators; the mightiest capital that had ever been.
Until the decay of the Empire eventually reached it and in the Great Sack of a century ago, its
drooping powers had been bent back upon themselves and broken forever. In the blasting ruin
of death, the metal shell that circled the planet wrinkled and crumpled into an aching mock of its
own grandeur.
The survivors tore up the metal plating and sold it to other planets for seed and cattle. The soil
was uncovered once more and the planet returned to its beginnings. In the spreading areas of
primitive agriculture, it forgot its intricate and colossal past.
Or would have but for the still mighty shards that heaped their massive ruins toward the sky in
bitter and dignified silence.
Arcadia watched the metal rim of the horizon with a stirring of the heart. The village in which the
Palvers lived was but a huddle of houses to her – small and primitive. The fields that
surrounded it were golden-yellow, wheat-cIogged tracts.
But there, just past the reaching point was the memory of the past, still glowing in unrusted
splendor, and burning with fire where the sun of Trantor caught it in gleaming highlights. She
had been there once during the months since she had arrived at Trantor. She had climbed onto
the smooth, unjointed pavement and ventured into the silent dust-streaked structures, where
the light entered through the jags of broken walls and partitions.
It had been solidified heartache. It had been blasphemy.
She had left, clangingly – running until her feet pounded softly on earth once more.
And then she could only look back longingly. She dared not disturb that mighty brooding once
more.
Somewhere on this world, she knew, she had been born – near the old Imperial Library, which
was the veriest Trantor of Trantor. It was the sacred of the sacred; the holy of holies! Of all the
world, it alone had survived the Great Sack and for a century it had remained complete and
untouched; defiant of the universe.
There Hari Seldon and his group had woven their unimaginable web. There Ebling Mis pierced
the secret, and sat numbed in his vast surprise, until he was killed to prevent the secret from
going further.
There at the Imperial Library, her grandparents had lived for ten years, until the Mule died, and
they could return to the reborn Foundation.
There at the Imperial Library, her own father returned with his bride to find the Second
Foundation once again, but failed. There, she had been born and there her mother had died.
She would have liked to visit the Library, but Preem Palver shook his round head. "It's
thousands of miles, Arkady, and there's so much to do here. Besides, it's not good to bother
there. You know; it's a shrine–"
But Arcadia knew that he had no desire to visit the Library; that it was a case of the Mule's
Palace over again. There was this superstitious fear on the part of the pygmies of the present
for the relies of the giants of the past.
Yet it would have been horrible to feel a grudge against the funny little man for that. She had
been on Trantor now for nearly three months and in all that time, he and she – Pappa and
Mamma – had been wonderful to her–
And what was her return? Why, to involve them in the common ruin. Had she warned them that
she was marked for destruction, perhaps? No! She let them assume the deadly role of
protectors.
Her conscience panged unbearably – yet what choice had she?
She stepped reluctantly down the stairs to breakfast. The voices reached her.
Preem Palver had tucked the napkin down his shirt collar with a twist of his plump neck and
had reached for his poached eggs with an uninhibited satisfaction.
"I was down in the city yesterday, Mamma," he said, wielding his fork and nearly drowning the
words with a capacious mouthful.
"And what is down in the city, Pappa?" asked Mamma indifferently, sitting down, looking
sharply about the table, and rising again for the salt.
"Ah, not so good. A ship came in from out Kalgan-way with newspapers from there. It's war
there."
"War! So! Well, let them break their heads, if they have no more sense inside. Did your pay
check come yet? Pappa, I'm telling you again. You warn old man Cosker this isn't the only
cooperative in the world. It's bad enough they pay you what I'm ashamed to tell my friends, but
at least on time they could be!"
"Time; shmime," said Pappa, irritably. "Look, don't make me silly talk at breakfast, it should
choke me each bite in the throat," and he wreaked havoc among the buttered toast as he said
it. He added, somewhat more moderately, "The fighting is between Kalgan and the Foundation,
and for two months, they've been at it."
His hands lunged at one another in mock-representation of a space fight.
"Um-m-m. And what's doing?"
"Bad for the Foundation. Well, you saw Kalgan; all soldiers. They were ready. The Foundation
was not, and so – poof!"
And suddenly, Mamma laid down her fork and hissed, "Fool!"
"Huh?"
"Dumb-head! Your big mouth is always moving and wagging."
She was pointing quickly and when Pappa looked over his shoulder, there was Arcadia, frozen
in the doorway.
She said, "The Foundation is at war?"
Pappa looked helplessly at Mamma, then nodded.
"And they're losing?"
Again the nod.
Arcadia felt the unbearable catch in her throat, and slowly approached the table. "Is it over?"
she whispered.
"Over?" repeated Pappa, with false heartiness. "Who said it was over? In war, lots of things can
happen. And ... and–"
"Sit down, darling," said Mamma, soothingly. "No one should talk before breakfast. You're not in
a healthy condition with no food in the stomach."
But Arcadia ignored her. "Are the Kalganians on Terminus?"
"No," said Pappa, seriously. "The news is from last week, and Terminus is still fighting. This is
honest. I'm telling the truth. And the Foundation is still strong. Do you want me to get you the
newspapers?"
"Yes!"
She read them over what she could eat of her breakfast and her eyes blurred as she read.
Santanni and Korell were gone – without a fight. A squadron of the Foundation's navy had been
trapped in the sparsely-sunned Ifni sector and wiped out to almost the last ship.
And now the Foundation was back to the Four-Kingdom core – the original Realm which had
been built up under Salvor Hardin, the first mayor. But still it fought – and still there might be a
chance-and whatever happened, she must inform her father. She must somehow reach his ear.
She must!
But how? With a war in the way.
She asked Pappa after breakfast, "Are you going out on a new mission soon, Mr. Palver?"
Pappa was on the large chair on the front lawn, sunning himself. A fat cigar smoldered between
his plump fingers and he looked like a beatific pug-dog.
"A mission?" he repeated, lazily. "Who knows? It's a nice vacation and my leave isn't up. Why
talk about new missions? You're restless, Arkady?"
"Me? No, I like it here. You're very good to me, you and Mrs. Palver."
He waved his hand at her, brushing away her words.
Arcadia said, "I was thinking about the war."
"But don't think about it. What can you do? If it's something you can't help, why hurt yourself
over it?"
"But I was thinking that the Foundation has lost most of its farming worlds. They're probably
rationing food there."
Pappa looked uncomfortable. "Don't worry. It'll be all right."
She scarcely listened. "I wish I could carry food to them, that's what. You know after the Mule
died, and the Foundation rebelled, Terminus was just about isolated for a time and General
Han Pritcher, who succeeded the Mule for a while was laying siege to it. Food was running
awfully low and my father says that his father told him that they only had dry amino-acid
concentrates that tasted terrible. Why, one egg cost two hundred credits. And then they broke
the siege just in time and food ships came through from Santanni. It must have been an awful
time. Probably it's happening all over, now."
There was a pause, and then Arcadia said, "You know, I'll bet the Foundation would be willing
to pay smuggler's prices for food now. Double and triple and more. Gee, if any co-operative, f'r
instance, here on Trantor took over the job, they might lose some ships, but, I'll bet they'd be
war millionaires before it was over. The Foundation Traders in the old days used to do that all
the time. There'd be a war, so they'd sell whatever was needed bad and take their chances.
Golly, they used to make as much as two million dollars out of one trip – profit. That was just
out of what they could carry on one ship, too."
Pappa stirred. His cigar had gone out, unnoticed. "A deal for food, huh? Hm-m-m– But the
Foundation is so far away."
"Oh, I know. I guess you couldn't do it from here. If you took a regular liner you probably
couldn't get closer than Massena or Smushyk, and after that you'd have to hire a small
scoutship or something to slip you through the lines."
Pappa's hand brushed at his hair, as he calculated.
Two weeks later, arrangements for the mission were completed. Mamma railed for most of the
time– First, at the incurable obstinacy with which he courted suicide. Then, at the incredible
obstinacy with which he refused to allow her to accompany him.
Pappa said, "Mamma, why do you act like an old lady. I can't take you. It's a man's work. What
do you think a war is? Fun? Child's play?"
"Then why do you go? Are you a man, you old fool – with a leg and half an arm in the grave.
Let some of the young ones go – not a fat bald-head like you?"
"I'm not a bald-head," retorted Pappa, with dignity. "I got yet lots of hair. And why should it not
be me that gets the commission? Why, a young fellow? Listen, this could mean millions?"
She knew that and she subsided.
Arcadia saw him once before he left.
She said, "Are you going to Terminus?"
"Why not? You say yourself they need bread and rice and potatoes. Well, I'll make a deal with
them, and they'll get it."
"Well, then – just one thing: If you're going to Terminus, could you ... would you see my father?"
And Pappa's face crinkled and seemed to melt into sympathy, "Oh – and I have to wait for you
to tell me. Sure, I'll see him. I'll tell him you're safe and everything's O.K., and when the war is
over, I'll bring you back."
"Thanks. I'll tell you how to find him. His name is Dr. Toran Darell and he lives in Stanmark.
That's just outside Terminus City, and you can get a little commuting plane that goes there.
We’re at 55 Channel Drive."
"Wait, and I’ll write it down."
"No, no," Arcadia's arm shot out. "You mustn't write anything down. You must remember – and
find him without anybody's help."
Pappa looked puzzled. Then he shrugged his shoulders. "All right, then. It's 55 Channel Drive
in Stanmark, outside Terminus City, and you commute there by plane. All right?"
"One other thing."
"Yes?"
"Would you tell him something from me?"
"Sure."
"I want to whisper it to you."
He leaned his plump cheek toward her, and the little whispered sound passed from one to the
other.
Pappa's eyes were round. "That's what you want me to say? But it doesn't make sense."
"He'll know what you mean. Just say I sent it and that I said he would know what it means. And
you say it exactly the way I told you. No different. You won't forget it?"
"How can I forget it? Five little words. Look–"
"No, no." She hopped up and down in the intensity of her feelings. "Don't repeat it. Don't ever
repeat it to anyone. Forget all about it except to my father. Promise me."
Pappa shrugged again. "I promise! All right!"
"All right," she said, mournfully, and as he passed down the drive to where the air taxi waited to
take him to the spaceport, she wondered if she had signed his death warrant. She wondered if
she would ever see him again.
She scarcely dared to walk into the house again to face the good, kind Mamma. Maybe when it
was all over, she had better kill herself for what she had done to them.
19
End of War
QUORISTON, BATTLE OF Fought on 9, 17, 377 F.E. between the forces of the Foundation
and those of Lord Stettin of Kalgan, it was the last battle of consequence during the
Interregnum ....
ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA
Jole Turbor, in his new role of war correspondent, found his bulk incased in a naval uniform,
and rather liked it. He enjoyed being back on the air, and some of the fierce helplessness of the
futile fight against the Second Foundation left him in the excitement of another sort of fight with
substantial ships and ordinary men.
To be sure, the Foundation's fight had not been remarkable for victories, but it was still possible
to be philosophic about the matter. After six months, the hard core of the Foundation was
untouched, and the hard core of the Fleet was still in being. With the new additions since the
start of the war, it was almost as strong numerically, and stronger technically, than before the
defeat at Ifni.
And meanwhile, planetary defenses were being strengthened; the armed forces better trained;
administrative efficiency was having some of the water squeezed out of it – and much of the
Kalganian's conquering fleet was being wallowed down through the necessity of occupying the
"conquered" territory.
At the moment, Turbor was with the Third Fleet in the outer reaches of the Anacreonian sector.
In line with his policy of making this a "little man's war," he was interviewing Fennel Leemor,
Engineer Third Class, volunteer.
"Tell us a little about yourself, sailor," said Turbor.
"Ain't much to tell," Leemor shuffled his feet and allowed a faint, bashful smile to cover his face,
as though he could see all the millions that undoubtedly could see him at the moment. I’m a
Locrian. Got a job in an air-car factory; section head and good pay. I'm married; got two kids,
both girls. Say, I couldn't say hello to them, could I – in case they're listening."
"Go ahead, sailor. The video is all yours."
"Gosh, thanks." He burbled, "Hello, Milla, in case you're listening, I'm fine. Is Sunni all right?
And Tomma? I think of you all the time and maybe I'll be back on furlough after we get back to
port. I got your food parcel but I'm sending it back. We get our regular mess, but they say the
civilians are a little tight. I guess that's all."
"I'll look her up next time I'm on Locris, sailor, and make sure she's not short of food. O.K.?"
The young man smiled broadly and nodded his head. "Thank you, Mr. Turbor. I’d appreciate
that."
"All right. Suppose you tell us, then– You're a volunteer, aren't you?"
"Sure am. If anyone picks a fight with me, I don't have to wait for anyone to drag me in. I joined
up the day I heard about the Hober Mallow."
"That's a fine spirit. Have you seen much action? I notice "You're wearing two battle stars."
"Ptah." The sailor spat. "Those weren't battles, they were chases. The Kalganians don't fight,
unless they have odds of five to one or better in their favor. Even then they just edge in and try
to cut us up ship by ship. Cousin of mine was at Ifni and he was on a ship that got away, the old
Ebling Mis. He says it was the same there. They had their Main Fleet against just a wing
division of ours, and down to where we only had five ships left, they kept stalking instead of
fighting. We got twice as many of their ships at that fight."
"Then you think we're going to win the war?"
Sure bet; now that we aren't retreating. Even if things got too bad, that's when I'd expect the
Second Foundation to step in. We still got the Seldon Plan – and they know it, too."
Turbor's lips curled a bit. "You're counting on the Second Foundation, then?"
The answer came with honest surprise. "Well, doesn't everyone?"
Junior Officer Tippellum stepped into Turbor's room after the visicast. He shoved a cigarette at
the correspondent and knocked his cap back to a perilous balance on the occiput.
"We picked up a prisoner," he said.
"Yes?"
"Little crazy fellow. Claims to be a neutral – diplomatic immunity, no less. I don't think they know
what to do with him. His name's Palvro, Palver, something like that, and he says he's from
Trantor. Don't know what in space he's doing in a war zone."
But Turbor had swung to a sitting position on his bunk and the nap he had been about to take
was forgotten. He remembered quite well his last interview with Darell, the day after war had
been declared and he was shoving off.
"Preem Palver," he said. It was a statement.
Tippellum paused and let the smoke trickle out the sides of his mouth. "Yeah," he said, "how in
space did you know?"
"Never mind. Can I see him?"
"Space, I can't say. The old man has him in his own room for questioning. Everyone figures
he's a spy."
"You tell the old man that I know him, if he's who he claims he is. I’II take the responsibility."
Captain Dixyl on the flagship of the Third Fleet watched unremittingly at the Grand Detector. No
ship could avoid being a source of subatomic radiation – not even if it were lying an inert mass
– and each focal point of such radiation was a little sparkle in the three-dimensional field.
Each one of the Foundation's ships were accounted for and no sparkle was left over, now that
the little spy who claimed to be a neutral had been picked up. For a while, that outside ship had
created a stir in the captain's quarters. The tactics might have needed changing on short notice.
As it was–
"Are you sure you have it?" he asked.
Commander Cenn nodded. "I will take my squadron through hyperspace: radius, 10.00
parsecs; theta, 268.52 degrees; phi, 84.15 degrees. Return to origin at 1330. Total absence
11.83 hours."
"Right. Now we are going to count on pin-point return as regards both space and time.
Understand?"
"Yes, captain." He looked at his wrist watch, "My ships will be ready by 0140."
"Good," said Captain Dixyl.
The Kalganian squadron was not within detector range now, but they would be soon. There
was independent information to that effect. Without Cenn's squadron the Foundation forces
would be badly outnumbered, but the captain was quite confident. Quite confident.
Preem Palver looked sadly about him. First at the tall, skinny admiral; then at the others,
everyone in uniform; and now at this last one, big and stout, with his collar open and no tie –
not like the rest – who said he wanted to speak to him.
Jole Turbor was saying: "I am perfectly aware, admiral, of the serious possibilities involved
here, but I tell you that if I can be allowed to speak to him for a few minutes, I may be able to
settle the current uncertainty."
"Is there any reason why you can't question him before me?"
Turbor pursed his lips and looked stubborn. "Admiral," he said, "while I have been attached to
your ships, the Third Fleet has received an excellent press. You may station men outside the
door, if you like, and you may return in five minutes. But, meanwhile, humor me a bit, and your
public relations will not suffer. Do you understand me?"
He did.
Then Turbor in the isolation that followed, turned to Palver, and said, "Quickly – what is the
name of the girl you abducted."
And Palver could simply stare round-eyed, and shake his head.
"No nonsense," said Turbor. "If you do not answer, you will be a spy and spies are blasted
without trial in war time."
"Arcadia Darell!" gasped Palver.
"Well! All right, then. Is she safe?"
Palver nodded.
"You had better be sure of that, or it won't be well for you."
"She is in good health, perfectly safe," said Palver, palely.
The admiral returned, "Well?"
"The man, sir, is not a spy. You may believe what he tells you. I vouch for him."
"That so?" The admiral frowned. "Then he represents an agricultural co-operative on Trantor
that wants to make a trade treaty with Terminus for the delivery of grains and potatoes. Well, all
right, but he can't leave now."
"Why not?" asked Palver, quickly.
"Because we're in the middle of a battle. After it is over – assuming we're still alive – we'll take
you to Terminus."
The Kalganian fleet that spanned through space detected the Foundation ships from an
incredible distance and were themselves detected. Like little fireflies in each other's Grand
Detectors, they closed in across the emptiness.
And the Foundation's admiral frowned and said, "This must be their main push. Look at the
numbers." Then, "They won't stand up before us, though; not if Cenn's detachment can be
counted on."
Commander Cenn had left hours before – at the first detection of the coming enemy. There was
no way of altering the plan now. It worked or it didn't, but the admiral felt quite comfortable. As
did the officers. As did the men.
Again watch the fireflies.
Like a deadly ballet dance, in precise formations, they sparked.
The Foundation fleet edged slowly backwards. Hours passed and the fleet veered slowly off,
teasing the advancing enemy slightly off course, then more so.
In the minds of the dictators of the battle plan, there was a certain volume of space that must
be occupied by the Kalganian ships. Out from that volume crept the Foundationers; into it
slipped the Kalganians. Those that passed out again were attacked, suddenly and fiercely.
Those that stayed within were not touched.
It all depended on the reluctance of the ships of Lord Stettin to take the initiative themselves –
on their willingness to remain where none attacked.
Captain Dixyl stared frigidly at his wrist watch. It was 1310, "We've got twenty minutes," he
said.
The lieutenant at his side nodded tensely, "It looks all right so far, captain. We've got more than
ninety percent of them boxed. If we can keep them that way–"
"Yes! If–"
The Foundation ships were drifting forward again – very slowly. Not quick enough to urge a
Kalganian retreat and just quickly enough to discourage a Kalganian advance. They preferred
to wait.
And the minutes passed.
At 1325, the admiral's buzzer sounded in seventy-five ships of the Foundation's line, and they
built up to a maximum acceleration towards the front-plane of the Kalganian fleet, itself three
hundred strong. Kalganian shields flared into action, and the vast energy beams flicked out.
Every one of the three hundred concentrated in the same direction, towards their mad attackers
who bore down relentlessly, uncaringly and–
At 1330, fifty ships under Commander Cenn appeared from nowhere, in one single bound
through hyperspace to a calculated spot at a calculated time – and were spaced in tearing fury
at the unprepared Kalganian rear.
The trap worked perfectly.
The Kalganians still had numbers on their side, but they were in no mood to count. Their first
effort was to escape and the formation once broken was only the more vulnerable, as the
enemy ships bumbled into one another's path.
After a while, it took on the proportions of a rat hunt.
Of three hundred Kalganian ships, the core and pride of their fleet, some sixty or less, many in
a state of near-hopeless disrepair, reached Kalgan once more. The Foundation loss was eight
ships out of a total of one hundred twenty-five.
Preem Palver landed on Terminus at the height of the celebration. He found the furore
distracting, but before he left the planet, he had accomplished two things, and received one
request.
The two things accomplished were: 1) the conclusion of an agreement whereby Palver's
co-operative was to deliver twenty shiploads of certain foodstuffs per month for the next year at
a war price, without, thanks to the recent battle, a corresponding war risk, and 2) the transfer to
Dr. Darell of Arcadia's five short words.
For a startled moment, Darell had stared wide-eyed at him, and then he had made his request.
It was to carry an answer back to Arcadia. Palver liked it; it was a simple answer and made
sense. It was: "Come back now. There won't be any danger."
Lord Stettin was in raging frustration. To watch his every weapon break in his hands; to feel the
firm fabric of his military might part like the rotten thread it suddenly turned out to be – would
have turned phlegmaticism itself into flowing lava. And yet he was helpless, and knew it.
He hadn't really slept well in weeks. He hadn't shaved in three days. He had canceled all
audiences. His admirals were left to themselves and none knew better than the Lord of Kalgan
that very little time and no further defeats need elapse before he would have to contend with
internal rebellion.
Lev Meirus, First Minister, was no help. He stood there, calm and indecently old, with his thin,
nervous finger stroking, as always, the wrinkled line from nose to chin.
"Well," shouted Stettin at him, "contribute something. We stand here defeated, do you
understand? Defeated! And why? I don't know why. There you have it. I don't know why. Do
you know why?"
"I think so," said Meirus, calmly.
"Treason!" The word came out softly, and other words followed as softly. "You've known of
treason, and you've kept quiet. You served the fool I ejected from the First Citizenship and you
think you can serve whatever foul rat replaces me. If you have acted so, I will extract your
entrails for it and burn them before your living eyes."
Meirus was unmoved. "I have tried to fill you with my own doubts, not once, but many times. I
have dinned it in your ears and you have preferred the advice of others because it stuffed your
ego better. Matters have turned out not as I feared, but even worse. If you do not care to listen
now, say so, sir, and I shall leave, and, in due course, deal with your successor, whose first act,
no doubt, will be to sign a treaty of peace."
Stettin stared at him red-eyed, enormous fists slowly clenching and unclenching. "Speak, you
gray slug. Speak!"
"I have told you often, sir, that you are not the Mule. You may control ships and guns but you
cannot control the minds of your subjects. Are you aware, sir, of who it is you are fighting? You
fight the Foundation, which is never defeated – the Foundation, which is protected by the
Seldon Plan – the Foundation, which is destined to form a new Empire."
"There is no Plan. No longer. Munn has said so."
"Then Munn is wrong. And if he were right, what then? You and I, sir, are not the people. The
men and women of Kalgan and its subject worlds believe utterly and deeply in the Seldon Plan
as do all the inhabitants of this end of the Galaxy. Nearly four hundred years of history teach
the fact that the Foundation cannot be beaten. Neither the kingdoms nor the warlords nor the
old Galactic Empire itself could do it."
"The Mule did it."
"Exactly, and he was beyond calculation – and you are not. What is worse, the people know
that you are not. So your ships go into battle fearing defeat in some unknown way. The
insubstantial fabric of the Plan hangs over them so that they are cautious and look before they
attack and wonder a little too much. While on the other side, that same insubstantial fabric fills
the enemy with confidence, removes fear, maintains morale in the face of early defeats. Why
not? The Foundation has always been defeated at first and has always won in the end.
"And your own morale, sir? You stand everywhere on enemy territory. Your own dominions
have not been invaded; are still not in danger of invasion – yet you are defeated. You don't
believe in the possibility, even, of victory, because you know there is none.
"Stoop, then, or you will be beaten to your knees. Stoop voluntarily, and you may save a
remnant. You have depended on metal and power and they have sustained you as far as they
could. You have ignored mind and morale and they have failed you. Now, take my advice. You
have the Foundation man, Homir Munn. Release him. Send him back to Terminus and he will
carry your peace offers."
Stettin's teeth ground behind his pale, set lips. But what choice had he?
On the first day of the new year, Homir Munn left Kalgan again. More than six months had
passed since he had left Terminus and in the interim, a war had raged and faded.
He had come alone, but he left escorted. He had come a simple man of private life; he left the
unappointed but nevertheless, actual, ambassador of peace.
And what had most changed was his early concern over the Second Foundation. He laughed at
the thought of that: and pictured in luxuriant detail the final revelation to Dr. Darell, to that
energetic, young competent, Anthor, to all of them–
He knew. He, Homir Munn, finally knew the truth.
20
"I Know ..."
The last two months of the Stettinian war did not lag for Homir. In his unusual office as Mediator
Extraordinary, he found himself the center of interstellar affairs, a role he could not help but find
pleasing.
There were no further major battles – a few accidental skirmishes that could scarcely count –
and the terms of the treaty were hammered out with little necessity for concessions on the part
of the Foundation. Stettin retained his office, but scarcely anything else. His navy was
dismantled; his possessions outside the home system itself made autonomous and allowed to
vote for return to previous status, full independence or confederation within the Foundation, as
they chose.
The war was formally ended on an asteroid in Terminus' own stellar system; site of the
Foundation's oldest naval base. Lev Meirus signed for Kalgan, and Homir was an interested
spectator.
Throughout all that period he did not see Dr. Darell, nor any of the others. But it scarcely
mattered. His news would keep – and, as always, he smiled at the thought.
Dr. Darell returned to Terminus some weeks after VK day, and that same evening, his house
served as the meeting place for the five men who, ten months earlier, had laid their first plans.
They lingered over dinner and then over wine as though hesitating to return again to the old
subject.
It was Jole Turbor, who, peering steadily into the purple depths of the wineglass with one eye,
muttered, rather than said, "Well, Homir, you are a man of affairs now, I see. You handled
matters well."
"I?" Munn laughed loudly and joyously. For some reason, he had not stuttered in months. "I
hadn't a thing to do with it. It was Arcadia. By the by, Darell, how is she? She's coming back
from Trantor, I heard?"
"You heard correctly," said Darell, quietly. "Her ship should dock within the week." He looked,
with veiled eyes, at the others, but there were only confused, amorphous exclamations of
pleasure. Nothing else.
Turbor said, "Then it's over, really. Who would have predicted all this ten months ago. Munn's
been to Kalgan and back. Arcadia's been to Kalgan and Trantor and is coming back. We've had
a war and won it, by Space. They tell you that the vast sweeps of history can be predicted, but
doesn't it seem conceivable that all that has just happened, with its absolute confusion to those
of us who lived through it, couldn't possibly have been predicted."
"Nonsense," said Anthor, acidly. "What makes you so triumphant, anyway? You talk as though
we have really won a war, when actually we have won nothing but a petty brawl which has
served only to distract our minds from the real enemy."
There was an uncomfortable silence, in which only Homir Munn's slight smile struck a
discordant note.
And Anthor struck the arm of his chair with a balled and furyfilled fist, "Yes, I refer to the
Second Foundation. There is no mention of it and, if I judge correctly, every effort to have no
thought of it. Is it because this fallacious atmosphere of victory that palls over this world of idiots
is so attractive that you feel you must participate? Turn somersaults then, handspring your way
into a wall, pound one another's back and throw confetti out the window. Do whatever you
please, only get it out of your system – and when you are quite done and you are yourselves
again, return and let us discuss that problem which exists now precisely as it did ten months
ago when you sat here with eyes cocked over your shoulders for fear of you knew not what. Do
you really think that the Mind-masters of the Second Foundation are less to be feared because
you have beat down a foolish wielder of spaceships."
He paused, red-faced and panting.
Munn said quietly, "Will you hear me speak now, Anthor? Or do you prefer to continue your role
as ranting conspirator?"
"Have your say, Homir," said Darell, "but let's all of us refrain from over-picturesqueness of
language. It's a very good thing in its place, but at present, it bores me."
Homir Munn leaned back in his armchair and carefully refilled his glass from the decanter at his
elbow.
"I was sent to Kalgan," he said, "to find out what I could from the records contained in the
Mule's Palace. I spent several months doing so. I seek no credit for that accomplishment. As I
have indicated, it was Arcadia whose ingenuous intermeddling obtained the entry for me.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that to my original knowledge of the Mule's life and times, which,
I submit, was not small, I have added the fruits of much labor among primary evidence which
has been available to no one else.
"I am, therefore, in a unique position to estimate the true danger of the Second Foundation;
much more so than is our excitable friend here."
"And," grated Anthor, "what is your estimate of that danger?"
"Why, zero."
A short pause, and Elvett Semic asked with an air of surprised disbelief, "You mean zero
danger?"
"Certainly. Friends, there is no Second Foundation!"
Anthor's eyelids closed slowly and he sat there, face pale and expressionless.
Munn continued, aftention-centering and loving it, "And what is more, there was never one."
"On what," asked Darell, "do you base this surprising conclusion?"
"I deny," said Munn, "that it is surprising. You all know the story of the Mule's search for the
Second Foundation. But what do you know of the intensity of that search – of the
single-mindedness of it. He had tremendous resources at his disposal and he spared none of it.
He was single-minded – and yet he failed. No Second Foundation was found."
"One could scarcely expect it to be found," pointed out Turbor, restlessly. "It had means of
protecting itself against inquiring minds."
"Even when the mind that is inquiring is the Mule's mutant mentality? I think not. But come, you
do not expect me to give you the gist of fifty volumes of reports in five minutes. All of it, by the
terms of the peace treaty will be part of the Seldon Historical Museum eventually, and you will
all be free to be as leisurely in your analysis as I have been. You will find his conclusion plainly
stated, however, and that I have already expressed. There is not, and has never been, any
Second Foundation."
Semic interposed, "Well, what stopped the Mule, then?"
"Great Galaxy, what do you suppose stopped him? Death did; as it will stop all of us. The
greatest superstition of the age is that the Mule was somehow stopped in an all-conquering
career by some mysterious entities superior even to himself. It is the result of looking at
everything in wrong focus.
"Certainly no one in the Galaxy can help knowing that the Mule was a freak, physical as well as
mental. He died in his thirties because his ill-adjusted body could no longer struggle its creaking
machinery along. For several years before his death he was an invalid. His best health was
never more than an ordinary man's feebleness. All right, then. He conquered the Galaxy and, in
the ordinary course of nature, proceeded to die. It's a wonder he proceeded as long and as well
as he did. Friends, it's down in the very clearest print. You have only to have patience. You
have only to try to look at all facts in new focus."
Darell said, thoughtfully, "Good, let us try that Munn. It would be an interesting attempt and, if
nothing else, would help oil our thoughts. These tampered men – the records of which Anthor
brought to us nearly a year ago, what of them? Help us to see them in focus."
"Easily. How old a science is encephalographic analysis? Or, put it another way, how
well-developed is the study of neuronic pathways."
"We are at the beginning in this respect. Granted," said Darell.
"Right. How certain can we be then as to the interpretation of what I've heard Anthor and
yourself call the Tamper Plateau. You have your theories, but how certain can you be. Certain
enough to consider it a firm basis for the existence of a mighty force for which all other
evidence is negative? It's always easy to explain the unknown by postulating a superhuman
and arbitrary will.
"It's a very human phenomenon. There have been cases all through Galactic history where
isolated planetary systems have reverted to savagery, and what have we learned there? In
every case, such savages attribute the to-them-incomprehensible forces of Nature – storms,
pestilences, droughts – to sentient beings more powerful and more arbitrary than men.
"It is called anthropomorphism, I believe, and in this respect, we are savages and indulge in it.
Knowing little of mental science, we blame anything we don't know on supermen – those of the
Second Foundation in this case, based on the hint thrown us by Seldon."
"Oh," broke in Anthor, "then you do remember Seldon. I thought you had forgotten. Seldon did
say there was a Second Foundation. Get that in focus.
"And are you aware then of all Seldon's purposes. Do you know what necessities were involved
in his calculations? The Second Foundation may have been a very necessary scarecrow, with
a highly specific end in view. How did we defeat Kalgan, for instance? What were you saying in
your last series of articles, Turbor?"
Turbor stirred his bulk. "Yes, I see what "You're driving at. I was on Kalgan towards the end,
Darell, and it was quite obvious that morale on the planet was incredibly bad. I looked through
their news-records and – well. they expected to be beaten. Actually, they were completely
unmanned by the thought that eventually the Second Foundation would take a hand, on the
side of the First, naturally."
"Quite right," said Munn. "I was there all through the war. I told Stettin there was no Second
Foundation and he believed me. He felt safe. But there was no way of making the people
suddenly disbelieve what they had believed all their lives, so that the myth eventually served a
very useful purpose in Seldon's cosmic chess game."
But Anthor's eyes opened, quite suddenly, and fixed themselves sardonically on Munn's
countenance. "I say you lie."
Homir turned pale, "I don't see that I have to accept, much less answer, an accusation of that
nature."
"I say it without any intention of personal offense. You cannot help lying; you don't realize that
you are. But you lie just the same."
Semic laid his withered hand on the young man's sleeve. "Take a breath, young fella."
Anthor shook him off, none too gently, and said, "I'm out of patience with all of you. I haven't
seen this man more than half a dozen times in my life, yet I find the change in him
unbelievable. The rest of you have known him for years, yet pass it by. It is enough to drive one
mad. Do you call this man you've been listening to Homir Munn? He is not the Homir Munn I
knew."
A medley of shock; above which Munn's voice cried, "You claim me to be an impostor?"
"Perhaps not in the ordinary sense," shouted Anthor above the din, "but an impostor
nonetheless. Quiet, everyone! I demand to be heard."
He frowned them ferociously into obedience. "Do any of you remember Homir Munn as I do –
the introverted librarian who never talked without obvious embarrassment; the man of tense
and nervous voice, who stuttered out his uncertain sentences? Does this man sound like him?
He's fluent, he's confident, he's fun of theories, and, by Space, he doesn't stutter. Is he the
same person?"
Even Munn looked confused, and Pelleas Anthor drove on. "Well, shall we test him?"
"How?" asked Darell.
"You ask how? There is the obvious way. You have his encephalographic record of ten months
ago, haven't you? Run one again, and compare."
He pointed at the frowning librarian, and said violently, "I dare him to refuse to subject himself
to analysis."
"I don't object," said Munn, defiantly. "I am the man I always was."
"Can you know?" said Anthor with contempt. "I’ll go further. I trust no one here. I want everyone
to undergo analysis. There has been a war. Munn has been on Kalgan; Turbor has been on
board ship and all over the war areas. Darell and Semic have been absent, too – I have no idea
where. Only I have remained here in seclusion and safety, and I no longer trust any of the rest
of you. And to play fair, I’ll submit to testing as well. Are we agreed then? Or do I leave now and
go my own way?"
Turbor shrugged and said, "I have no objection."
"I have already said I don't," said Munn.
Semic moved a hand in silent assent, and Anthor waited for Darell. Finally, Darell nodded his
head.
"Take me first," said Anthor.
The needles traced their delicate way across the cross-hatchings as the young neurologist sat
frozen in the reclining seat, with lidded eyes brooding heavily. From the files, Darell removed
the folder containing Anthor's old encephalographic record. He showed them to Anthor.
"That's your own signature, isn't it?"
"Yes, yes. It's my record. Make the comparison."
The scanner threw old and new on to the screen. All six curves in each recording were there,
and in the darkness, Munn's voice sounded in harsh clarity. "Well, now, look there. There's a
change."
"Those are the primary waves of the frontal lobe. It doesn't mean a thing, Homir. Those
additional jags you're pointing to are just anger. It's the others that count."
He touched a control knob and the six pairs melted into one another and coincided. The deeper
amplitude of primaries alone introduced doubling.
"Satisfied?" asked Anthor.
Darell nodded curtly and took the seat himself. Semic followed him and Turbor followed him.
Silently the curves were collected; silently they were compared.
Munn was the last to take his seat. For a moment, he hesitated, then, with a touch of
desperation in his voice, he said, "Well now, look, I'm coming in last and I'm under tension. I
expect due allowance to be made for that."
"There will be," Darell assured him. "No conscious emotion of yours will affect more than the
primaries and they are not important."
It might have been hours, in the utter silence that followed
And then in the darkness of the comparison, Anthor said huskily: "Sure, sure, it's only the onset
of a complex. Isn't that what he told us? No such thing as tampering; it's all a silly
anthropomorphic notion – but look at it! A coincidence I suppose."
"What's the matter?" shrieked Munn.
Darell's hand was tight on the librarian's shoulder. "Quiet, Munn – you've been handled; you've
been adjusted by them."
Then the light went on, and Munn was looking about him with broken eyes, making a horrible
attempt to smile.
"You can't be serious, surely. There is a purpose to this. You're testing me."
But Darell only shook his head. "No, no, Homir. It's true."
The librarian's eyes were filled with tears, suddenly. "I don't feel any different. I can't believe it."
With sudden conviction: "You are all in this. It's a conspiracy."
Darell attempted a soothing gesture, and his hand was struck aside. Munn snarled, "You're
planning to kill me. By Space, you're planning to kill me."
With a lunge, Anthor was upon him. There was the sharp crack of bone against bone, and
Homir was limp and flaccid with that look of fear frozen on his face.
Anthor rose shakily, and said, "We'd better tie and gag him. Later, we can decide what to do."
He brushed his long hair back.
Turbor said, "How did you guess there was something wrong with him?"
Anthor turned sardonically upon him. "It wasn't difficult. You see, I happen to know where the
Second Foundation really is."
Successive shocks have a decreasing effect–
It was with actual mildness that Semic asked, "Are you sure? I mean we’ve just gone through
this sort of business with Munn–"
This isn't quite the same," returned Anthor. "Darell, the day the war started, I spoke to you most
seriously. I tried to have you leave Terminus. I would have told you then what I will tell you now,
if I had been able to trust you."
"You mean you have known the answer for half a year?" smiled Darell.
"I have known it from the time I learned that Arcadia had left for Trantor."
And Darell started to his feet in sudden consternation. "What had Arcadia to do with it? What
are you implying?"
"Absolutely nothing that is not plain on the face of all the events we know so well. Arcadia goes
to Kalgan and flees in terror to the very center of the Galaxy, rather than return home.
Lieutenant Dirige, our best agent on Kalgan is tampered with. Homir Munn goes to Kalgan and
he is tampered with. The Mule conquered the Galaxy, but, queerly enough, he made Kalgan his
headquarters, and it occurs to me to wonder if he was conqueror or, perhaps, tool. At every
turn, we meet with Kalgan, Kalgan – nothing but Kalgan, the world that somehow survived
untouched all the struggles of the warlords for over a century."
"Your conclusion, then."
"Is obvious," Anthor's eyes were intense. "The Second Foundation is on Kalgan."
Turbor interrupted. "I was on Kalgan, Anthor. I was there last week. If there was any Second
Foundation on it, I'm mad. Personally, I think you're mad."
The young man whirled on him savagely. "Then you're a fat fool. What do you expect the
Second Foundation to be? A grammar school? Do you think that Radiant Fields in tight beams
spell out ‘Second Foundation' in green and purple along the incoming spaceship routes? Listen
to me, Turbor. Wherever they are, they form a tight oligarchy. They must be as well hidden on
the world on which they exist, as the world itself is in the Galaxy as a whole."
Turbor's jaw muscles writhed. "I don't like your attitude, Anthor."
"That certainly disturbs me," was the sarcastic response. "Take a look about you here on
Terminus. We’re at the center – the core – the origin of the First Foundation with all its
knowledge of physical science. Well, how many of the population are physical scientists? Can
you operate an Energy Transmitting Station? What do you know of the operation of a
hyperatomic motor? Eh? The number of real scientists on Terminus – even on Terminus – can
be numbered at less than one percent of the population.
"And what then of the Second Foundation where secrecy must be preserved. There will still be
less of the cognoscenti, and these will be hidden even from their own world."
"Say," said Semic, carefully. "We just licked Kalgan–"
"So we did. So we did," said Anthor, sardonically. "Oh, we celebrate that victory. The cities are
still illuminated; they are still shooting off fireworks; they are still shouting over the televisors.
But now, now, when the search is on once more for the Second Foundation, where is the last
place well look; where is the last place anyone will look? Right!" Kalgan!
"We haven't hurt them, you know; not really. We've destroyed some ships, killed a few
thousands, torn away their Empire, taken over some of their commercial and economic power –
but that all means nothing. I'll wager that not one member of the real ruling class of Kalgan is in
the least discomfited. On the contrary, they are now safe from curiosity. But not from my
curiosity. What do you say, Darell?"
Darell shrugged his shoulders. "Interesting. I’m trying to fit it in with a message I received from
Arcadia a few months since."
"Oh, a message?" asked Anthor. "And what was it?"
"Well, I'm not certain. Five short words. But its interesting."
"Look," broke in Semic, with a worried interest, "there's something I don't understand."
"What's that?"
Semic chose his words carefully, his old upper lip lifting with each word as if to let them out
singly and reluctantly. "Well, now, Homir Munn was saying just a while ago that Hari Seldon
was faking when he said that he had established a Second Foundation. Now you're saying that
it's not so; that Seldon wasn't faking, eh?"
"Right, he wasn't faking. Seldon said he had established a Second Foundation and so he had."
"All right, then, but he said something else, too. He said he established the two Foundations at
opposite ends of the Galaxy. Now, young man, was that a fake – because Kalgan isn't at the
opposite end of the Galaxy."
Anthor seemed annoyed, "That's a minor point. That part may well have been a cover up to
protect them. But after all, think– What real use would it serve to have the Mind-masters at the
opposite end of the Galaxy? What is their function? To help preserve the Plan. Who are the
main card players of the Plan? We, the First Foundation. Where can they best observe us,
then, and serve their own ends? At the opposite end of the Galaxy? Ridiculous! They're within
fifty parsecs, actually, which is much more sensible."
"I like that argument," said Darell. "It makes sense. Look here, Munn's been conscious for some
time and I propose we loose him. He can't do any harm, really."
Anthor looked rebellious, but Homir was nodding vigorously. Five seconds later he was rubbing
his wrists just as vigorously.
"How do you feel?" asked Darell.
"Rotten," said Munn, sulkily, "but never mind. There's something I want to ask this bright young
thing here. I've heard what he's had to say, and I’d just like permission to wonder what we do
next."
There was a queer and incongruous silence.
Munn smiled bitterly. "Well, suppose Kalgan is the Second Foundation. Who on Kalgan are
they? How are you going to find them? How are you going to tackle them if you find them, eh?"
"Ah," said Darell, "I can answer that, strangely enough. Shall I tell you what Semic and I have
been doing this past half-year? It may give you another reason, Anthor, why I was anxious to
remain on Terminus all this time."
"In the first place," he went on, "I've been working on encephalographic analysis with more
purpose than any of you may suspect. Detecting Second Foundation minds is a little more
subtle than simply finding a Tamper Plateau – and I did not actually succeed. But I came close
enough.
"Do you know, any of you, how emotional control works? It's been a popular subject with fiction
writers since the time of the Mule and much nonsense has been written, spoken, and recorded
about it. For the most part, it has been treated as something mysterious and occult. Of course,
it isn't. That the brain is the source of a myriad, tiny electromagnetic fields, everyone knows.
Every fleeting emotion varies those fields in more or less intricate fashion, and everyone should
know that, too.
"Now it is possible to conceive a mind which can sense these changing fields and even
resonate with them. That is, a special organ of the cerebrum can exist which can take on
whatever field-pattern it may detect. Exactly how it would do this, I have no idea, but that
doesn't matter. if I were blind, for instance, I could still learn the significance of photons and
energy quanta and it could be reasonable to me that the absorption of a photon of such energy
could create chemical changes in some organ of the body such that its presence would be
detectable. But, of course, I would not be able, thereby, to understand color.
"Do all of you follow?"
There was a firm nod from Anthor; a doubtful nod from the others.
"Such a hypothetical Mind Resonating Organ, by adjusting itself to the Fields emitted by other
minds could perform what is popularly known as 'reading emotion’ or even 'reading minds,’
which is actually something even more subtle. It is but an easy step from that to imagining a
similar organ which could actually force an adjustment on another mind. It could orient with its
stronger Field the weaker one of another mind – much as a strong magnet will orient the atomic
dipoles in a bar of steel and leave it magnetized thereafter.
"I solved the mathematics of Second Foundationism in the sense that I evolved a function that
would predict the necessary combination of neuronic paths that would allow for the formation of
an organ such as I have just described – but, unfortunately, the function is too complicated to
solve by any of the mathematical tools at present known. That is too bad, because it means
that I can never detect a Mind-worker by his encephalographic pattern alone.
"But I could do something else. I could, with Semic's help, construct what I shall describe as a
Mental Static device. It is not beyond the ability of modem science to create an energy source
that will duplicate an encephalograph-type pattern of electromagnetic field. Moreover, it can be
made to shift at complete random, creating, as far as this particular mind-sense is concerned, a
sort of 'noise' or 'static' which masks other minds with which it may be in contact.
"Do you still follow?"
Semic chuckled. He had helped create blindly, but he had guessed, and guessed correctly. The
old man had a trick or two left–
Anthor said, "I think I do."
"The device," continued Darell, "is a fairly easy one to produce, and I had all the resources of
the Foundation under my control as it came under the heading of war research. And now the
mayor's offices and the Legislative assemblies are surrounded with Mental Static. So are most
of our key factories. So is this building. Eventually, any place we wish can be made absolutely
safe from the Second Foundation or from any future Mule. And that's it."
He ended quite simply with a flat-palmed gesture of the hand.
Turbor seemed stunned. "Then it's all over. Great Seldon, it's all over."
"Well," said Darell, "not exactly."
"How, not exactly? Is there something more?"
"Yes, we haven't located the Second Foundation yet!"
"What," roared Anthor, "are you trying to say–"
"Yes, I am. Kalgan is not the Second Foundation."
"How do you know?"
"It's easy," grunted Darell. "You see I happen to know where the Second Foundation really is."
21
The Answer That Satisfied
Turbor laughed suddenly – laughed in huge, windy gusts that bounced ringingly off the walls
and died in gasps. He shook his head, weakly, and said, "Great Galaxy, this goes on all night.
One after another, we put up our straw men to be knocked down. We have fun, but we don't get
anywhere. Space! Maybe all planets are the Second Foundation. Maybe they have no planet,
just key men spread on all the planets. And what does it matter, since Darell says we have the
perfect defense?"
Darell smiled without humor. "The perfect defense is not enough, Turbor. Even my Mental
Static device is only something that keeps us in the same place. We cannot remain forever with
our fists doubled, frantically staring in all directions for the unknown enemy. We must know not
only how to win, but whom to defeat. And there is a specific world on which the enemy exists."
"Get to the point," said Anthor, wearily. "What's your information?"
"Arcadia," said Darell, "sent me a message, and until I got it, I never saw the obvious. I
probably would never have seen the obvious. Yet it was a simple message that went: 'A circle
has no end.’ Do you see?"
"No," said Anthor, stubbornly, and he spoke, quite obviously, for the others.
"A circle has no end," repeated Munn, thoughtfully, and his forehead furrowed.
"Well," said Darell, impatiently, "it was clear to me– What is the one absolute fact we know
about the Second Foundation, eh? I'll tell you! We know that Hari Seldon located it at the
opposite end of the Galaxy. Homir Munn theorized that Seldon lied about the existence of the
Foundation. Pelleas Anthor theorized that Seldon had told the truth that far, but lied about the
location of the Foundation. But I tell you that Hari Seldon lied in no particular; that he told the
absolute truth.
"But, what is the other end? The Galaxy is a flat, lens-shaped object. A cross section along the
flatness of it is a circle, and a circle had no end – as Arcadia realized. We – we, the First
Foundation – are located on Terminus at the rim of that circle. We are at an end of the Galaxy,
by definition. Now follow the rim of that circle and find the other end. Follow it, follow it, follow it,
and you will find no other end. You will merely come back to your starting point–
"And there you will find the Second Foundation."
"There?" repeated Anthor. "Do you mean here?"
"Yes, I mean here!" cried Darell, energetically. "Why, where else could it possibly be? You said
yourself that if the Second Foundationers were the guardians of the Seldon Plan, it was unlikely
that they could be located at the so-called other end of the Galaxy, where they would be as
isolated as they could conceivably be. You thought that fifty parsecs distance was more
sensible. I tell you that that is also too far. That no distance at all is more sensible. And where
would they be safest? Who would look for them here? Oh, it's the old principle of the most
obvious place being the least suspicious.
"Why was poor Ebling Mis so surprised and unmanned by his discovery of the location of the
Second Foundation? There he was, looking for it desperately in order to warn it of the coming
of the Mule, only to find that the Mule had already captured both Foundations at a stroke. And
why did the Mule himself fail. in his search? Why not? If one is searching for an unconquerable
menace, one would scarcely look among the enemies already conquered. So the
Mind-masters, in their own leisurely time, could lay their plans to stop the Mule, and succeeded
in stopping him.
"Oh, it is maddeningly simple. For here we are with our plots and our schemes, thinking that we
are keeping our secrecy – when all the time we are in the very heart and core of our enemy's
stronghold. It's humorous."
Anthor did not remove the skepticism from his face, "You honestly believe this theory, Dr.
Darell?"
"I honestly believe it."
"Then any of our neighbors, any man we pass in the street might be a Second Foundation
superman, with his mind watching yours and feeling the pulse of its thoughts."
"Exactly."
"And we have been permitted to proceed all this time, without molestation?"
"Without molestation? Who told you we were not molested? You, yourself, showed that Munn
has been tampered with. What makes you think that we sent him to Kalgan in the first place
entirely of our own volition – or that Arcadia overheard us and followed him on her own volition?
Hah! We have been molested without pause, probably. And after all, why should they do more
than they have? It is far more to their benefit to mislead us, than merely to stop us."
Anthor buried himself in meditation and emerged therefrom with a dissatisfied expression.
"Well, then, I don't like it. Your Mental Static isn't worth a thought. We can't stay in the house
forever and as soon as we leave, we're lost, with what we now think we know. Unless you can
build a little machine for every inhabitant in the Galaxy."
"Yes, but we're not quite helpless, Anthor. These men of the Second Foundation have a special
sense which we lack. It is their strength and also their weakness. For instance, is there any
weapon of attack that will be effective against a normal, sighted man which is useless against a
blind man?"
"Sure," said Munn, promptly. "A light in the eyes."
"Exactly," said Darell. "A good, strong blinding light."
"Well, what of it?" asked Turbor.
"But the analogy is clear. I have a Mind Static device. It sets up an artificial electromagnetic
pattern, which to the mind of a man of the Second Foundation would be like a beam of light to
us. But the Mind Static device is kaleidoscopic. It shifts quickly and continuously, faster than the
receiving mind can follow. All right then, consider it a flickering light; the kind that would give
you a headache, if continued long enough. Now intensify that light or that electromagnetic field
until it is blinding – and it will become a pain, an unendurable pain. But only to those with the
proper sense; not to the unsensed."
"Really?" said Anthor, with the beginnings of enthusiasm. "Have you tried this?"
"On whom? Of course, I haven't tried it. But it will work."
"Well, where do you have the controls for the Field that surrounds the house? Id like to see this
thing."
"Here." Darell reached into his jacket pocket. It was a small thing, scarcely bulging his pocket.
He tossed the black, knob-studded cylinder to the other.
Anthor inspected it carefully and shrugged his shoulders. "It doesn't make me any smarter to
look at it. Look Darell, what mustn't I touch? I don't want to turn off the house defense by
accident, you know."
"You won't," said Darell, indifferently. "That control is locked in place." He flicked at a toggle
switch that didn't move.
"And what's this knob?"
"That one varies rate of shift of pattern. Here – this one varies the intensity. It's that which I've
been referring to."
"May I–" asked Anthor, with his finger on the intensity knob. The others were crowding close.
"Why not?" shrugged DarelI. "It won't affect us."
Slowly, almost wincingly, Anthor turned the knob, first in one direction, then in another. Turbor
was gritting his teeth, while Munn blinked his eyes rapidly. It was as though they were keening
their inadequate sensory equipment to locate this impulse which could not affect them.
Finally, Anthor shrugged and tossed the control box back into Darell's lap. "Well, I suppose we
can take your word for it. But it's certainly hard to imagine that anything was happening when I
turned the knob."
"But naturally, Pelleas Anthor," said Darell, with a tight smile. "The one I gave you was a
dummy. You see I have another." He tossed his jacket aside and seized a duplicate of the
control box that Anthor had been investigating, which swung from his belt.
"You see," said Darell, and in one gesture turned the intensity knob to maximum.
And with an unearthly shriek, Pelleas Anthor sank to the floor. He rolled in his agony; whitened,
gripping fingers clutching and tearing futilely at his hair.
Munn lifted his feet hastily to prevent contact with the squirming body, and his eyes were twin
depths of horror. Semic and Turbor were a pair of plaster casts; stiff and white.
Darell, somber, turned the knob back once more. And Anthor twitched feebly once or twice and
lay still. He was alive, his breath racking his body.
"Lift him on to the couch," said Darell, grasping the young man's head. "Help me here."
Turbor reached for the feet. They might have been lifting a sack of flour. Then, after long
minutes, the breathing grew quieter, and Anthor's eyelids fluttered and lifted. His face was a
horrid yellow; his hair and body was soaked in perspiration, and his voice, when he spoke, was
cracked and unrecognizable.
"Don't," he muttered, "don't! Don't do that again! You don't know– You don't know– Oh-h-h." It
was a long, trembling moan.
"We won't do it again," said Darell, "if you will tell us the truth. You are a member of the Second
Foundation?"
"Let me have some water," pleaded Anthor.
"Get some, Turbor," said Darell, "and bring the whiskey bottle."
He repeated the question after pouring a jigger of whiskey and two glasses of water into
Anthor. Something seemed to relax in the young man–
"Yes," he said, wearily. "I am a member of the Second Foundation."
"Which," continued Darell, "is located on Terminus – here?"
"Yes, yes. You are right in every particular, Dr. Darell."
"Good! Now explain what's been happening this past half year. Tell us!"
"I would like to sleep," whispered Anthor.
"Later! Speak now!"
A tremulous sigh. Then words, low and hurried. The others bent over him to catch the sound,
"The situation was growing dangerous. We knew that Terminus and its physical scientists were
becoming interested in brain-wave patterns and that the times were ripe for the development of
something like the Mind Static device. And there was growing enmity toward the Second
Foundation. We had to stop it without ruining SeIdon's Plan.
"We ... we tried to control the movement. We tried to join it. It would turn suspicion and efforts
away from us. We saw to it that Kalgan declared war as a further distraction. That's why I sent
Munn to Kalgan. Stettin's supposed mistress was one of us. She saw to it that Munn made the
proper moves–"
"Callia is–" cried Munn, but Darell waved him silent.
Anthor continued, unaware of any interruption, "Arcadia followed. We hadn't counted on that –
can't foresee everything – so Callia maneuvered her to Trantor to prevent interference. That's
all. Except that we lost."
"You tried to get me to go to Trantor, didn't you?" asked Darell.
Anthor nodded, "Had to get you out of the way. The growing triumph in your mind was clear
enough. You were solving the problems of the Mind Static device."
"Why didn't you put me under control?"
"Couldn't ... couldn't. Had my orders. We were working according to a Plan. If I improvised, I
would have thrown everything off. Plan only predicts probabilities ... you know that ... like
Seldon's Plan." He was talking in anguished pants, and almost incoherently. His head twisted
from side to side in a restless fever. "We worked with individuals ... not groups ... very low
probabilities involved ... lost out. Besides ... if control you ... someone else invent device ... no
use ... had to control times ... more subtle ... First Speaker's own plan ... don't know all angles
... except ... didn't work a-a-a–" He ran down.
Darell shook him roughly, "You can't sleep yet. How many of you are there?"
"Huh? Whatjasay ... oh ... not many ... be surprised fifty ... don't need more."
"All here on Terminus?"
"Five ... six out in Space ... like Callia ... got to sleep."
He stirred himself suddenly as though to one giant effort, and his expressions gained in clarity.
It was a last attempt at self-justification, at moderating his defeat.
"Almost got you at the end. Would have turned off defenses and seized you. Would have seen
who was master. But you gave me dummy controls ... suspected me all along–"
And finally he was asleep.
Turbor said, in awed tones, "How long did you suspect him, Darell?"
"Ever since he first came here," was the quiet response. "He came from Kleise, he said. But I
knew Kleise; and I knew on what terms we parted. He was a fanatic on the subject of the
Second Foundation and I had deserted him. My own purposes were reasonable, since I
thought it best and safest to pursue my own notions by myself. But I couldn't tell Kleise that;
and he wouldn't have listened if I had. To him, I was a coward and a traitor, perhaps even an
agent of the Second Foundation. He was an unforgiving man and from that time almost to the
day of his death he had no dealings with me. Then, suddenly, in his last few weeks of life, he
writes me – as an old friend – to greet his best and most promising pupil as a co-worker and
begin again the old investigation.
"It was out of character. How could he possibly do such a thing without being under outside
influence, and I began to wonder if the only purpose might not be to introduce into my
confidence a real agent of the Second Foundation. Well, it was so–"
He sighed and closed his own eyes for a moment.
Semic put in hesitantly, "What will we do with all of them ... these Second Foundation fellas?"
"I don't know," said Darell, sadly. "We could exile them, I suppose. There's Zoranel, for
instance. They can be placed there and the planet saturated with Mind Static. The sexes can
be separated, or, better still, they can be sterilized – and in fifty years, the Second Foundation
will be a thing of the past. Or perhaps a quiet death for all of them would be kinder."
"Do you suppose," said Turbor, "we could learn the use of this sense of theirs. Or are they born
with it, like the Mule."
"I don't know. I think it is developed through long training, since there are indications from
encephalography that the potentialities of it are latent in the human mind. But what do you want
that sense for? It hasn't helped them."
He frowned.
Though he said nothing, his thoughts were shouting.
It had been too easy – too easy. They had fallen, these invincibles, fallen like book-villains, and
he didn't like it.
Galaxy! When can a man know he is not a puppet? How can a man know he is not a puppet?
Arcadia was coming home, and his thoughts shuddered away from that which he must face in
the end.
She was home for a week, then two, and he could not loose the tight check upon those
thoughts. How could he? She had changed from child to young woman in her absence, by
some strange alchemy. She was his link to life; his fink to a bittersweet marriage that scarcely
outlasted his honeymoon.
And then, late one evening, he said as casually as he could, "Arcadia, what made you decide
that Terminus contained both Foundations?"
They had been to the theater; in the best seats with private trimensional viewers for each; her
dress was new for the occasion, and she was happy.
She stared at him for a moment, then tossed it off. "Oh, I Don't know, Father. It just came to
me."
A layer of ice thickened about Dr. Darell's heart.
"Think," he said, intensely. "This is important. What made you decide both Foundations were
on Terminus."
She frowned slightly. "Well, there was Lady Callia. I knew she was a Second Foundationer.
Anthor said so, too."
"But she was on Kalgan," insisted Darell. "What made you decide on Terminus?"
And now Arcadia waited for several minutes before she answered. What had made her decide?
What had made her decide?
She had the horrible sensation of something slipping just beyond her grasp.
She said, "She knew about things – Lady Callia did – and must have had her information from
Terminus. Doesn't that sound right, Father?
But he just shook his head at her.
"Father," she cried, "I knew. The more I thought, the surer I was. It just made sense."
There was that lost look in her father's eyes, "It's no good, Arcadia. Its no good. Intuition is
suspicious when concerned with the Second Foundation. You see that, don't you? It might have
been intuition – and it might have been control!"
"Control! You mean they changed me? Oh, no. No, they couldn't." She was backing away from
him. "But didn't Anthor say I was right? He admitted it. He admitted everything. And you've
found the whole bunch right here on Trantor. Didn't you? Didn't you?" She was breathing
quickly.
"I know, but– Arcadia, will you let me make an encephalographic analysis of your brain?'
She shook her head violently, "No, no! I'm too scared."
"Of me, Arcadia? There's nothing to be afraid of. But we must know. You see that, don't you?"
She interrupted him only once, after that. She clutched at his arm just before the last switch
was thrown. "What if I am different, Father? What will you have to do?"
"I won't have to do anything, Arcadia. If you're different, well leave. Well go back to Trantor, you
and I, and ... and we won't care about anything else in the Galaxy."
Never in Darell's life had an analysis proceeded so slowly, cost him so much, and when it was
over, Arcadia huddled down and dared not look. Then she heard him laugh and that was
information enough. She jumped up and threw herself into his opened arms.
He was babbling wildly as they squeezed one another, "The house is under maximum Mind
Static and your brain-waves are normal. We really have trapped them, Arcadia, and we can go
back to living."
"Father," she gasped, "can we let them give us medals now?"
"How did you know I’d asked to be left out of it?" He held her at arm's mind; you know
everything. All right, you can have your medal on a platform, with speeches."
"And Father?"
"Yes?"
"Can you call me Arkady from now on."
"But– Very well, Arkady."
Slowly the magnitude of the victory was soaking into him and saturating him. The Foundation –
the First Foundation – now the only Foundation – was absolute master of the Galaxy. No
further barrier stood between themselves and the Second Empire – the final fulfillment of
Seldon's Plan.
They had only to reach for it–
Thanks to–
22
The Answer That Was True
An unlocated room on an unlocated world!
And a man whose plan had worked.
The First Speaker looked up at the Student, "Fifty men and women," he said. "Fifty martyrs!
They knew it meant death or permanent imprisonment and they could not even be oriented to
prevent weakening – since orientation might have been detected. Yet they did not weaken.
They brought the plan through, because they loved the greater Plan."
"Might they have been fewer?" asked the Student, doubtfully.
The First Speaker slowly shook his head, "It was the lower limit. Less could not possibly have
carried conviction. In fact, pure objectivism would have demanded seventy-five to leave margin
for error. Never mind. Have you studied the course of action as worked out by the Speakers'
Council fifteen years ago?"
"Yes, Speaker."
"And compared it with actual developments?"
"Yes, Speaker." Then, after a pause–
"I was quite amazed, Speaker."
"I know. There is always amazement. If you knew how many men labored for how many
months – years, in fact – to bring about the polish of perfection, you would be less amazed.
Now tell me what happened – in words. I want your translation of the mathematics."
"Yes, Speaker." The young man marshaled his thoughts. "Essentially, it was necessary for the
men of the First Foundation to be thoroughly convinced that they had located and destroyed
the Second Foundation. In that way, there would be reversion to the intended original. To all
intents, Terminus would once again know nothing about us; include us in none of their
calculations. We are hidden once more, and safe – at the cost of fifty men."
"And the purpose of the Kalganian war?"
"To show the Foundation that they could beat a physical enemy – to wipe out the damage done
to their self-esteem and self-assuredness by the Mule."
"There you are insufficient in your analysis. Remember, the population of Terminus regarded us
with distinct ambivalence. They hated and envied our supposed superiority; yet they relied on
us implicitly for protection. If we had been 'destroyed' before the Kalganian war, it would have
meant panic throughout the Foundation. They would then never have had the courage to stand
up against Stettin, when he then attacked; and he would have. Only in the full flush of victory
could the 'destruction' have taken place with minimum ill-effects. Even waiting a year,
thereafter, might have meant a too-great cooling off spirit for success."
The Student nodded. "I see. Then the course of history will proceed without deviation in the
direction indicated by the Plan."
"Unless," pointed out the First Speaker, "further accidents, unforeseen and individual, occur."
"And for that," said the Student, "we still exist. Except– Except– One facet of the present state
of affairs worries me, Speaker. The First Foundation is left with the Mind Static device – a
powerful weapon against us. That, at least, is not as it was before."
"A good point. But they have no one to use it against. It has become a sterile device; just as
without the spur of our own menace against them, encephalographic analysis will become a
sterile science. Other varieties of knowledge will once again bring more important and
immediate returns. So this first generation of mental scientists among the First Foundation will
also be the last – and, in a century, Mind Static will be a nearly forgotten item of the past."
"Well–" The Student was calculating mentally. "I suppose you're right."
But what I want you most to realize, young man, for the sake of your future in the Council is the
consideration given to the tiny intermeshings that were forced into our plan of the last decade
and a half simply because we dealt with individuals. There was the manner in which Anthor had
to create suspicion against himself in such a way that it would mature at the right time, but that
was relatively simple.
"There was the manner in which the atmosphere was so manipulated that to no one on
Terminus would it occur, prematurely, that Terminus itself might be the center they were
seeking. That knowledge had to be supplied to the young girl, Arcadia, who would be heeded
by no one but her own father. She had to be sent to Trantor, thereafter, to make certain that
there would be no premature contact with her father. Those two were the two poles of a
hyperatomic motor; each being inactive without the other. And the switch had to be thrown –
contact had to be made – at just the right moment. I saw to that!
"And the final battle had to be handled properly. The Foundation's fleet had to be soaked in
self-confidence, while the fleet of Kalgan made ready to run. I saw to that, also!"
Said the Student, "It seems to me, Speaker, that you ... I mean, all of us ... were counting on
Dr. Darell not suspecting that Arcadia was our tool. According to my check on the calculations,
there was something like a thirty percent probability that he would so suspect. What would have
happened then?"
"We had taken care of that. What have you been taught about Tamper Plateaus? What are
they? Certainly not evidence of the introduction of an emotional bias. That can be done without
any chance of possible detection by the most refined conceivable encephalographic analysis. A
consequence of Leffert's Theorem, you know. It is the removal, the cutting-out, of previous
emotional bias, that shows. It must show.
"And, of course, Anthor made certain that Darell knew all about Tamper Plateaus.
"However– When can an individual be placed under Control without showing it? Where there is
no previous emotional bias to remove. In other words, when the individual is a new-born infant
with a blank slate of a mind. Arcadia Darell was such an infant here on Trantor fifteen years
ago, when the first line was drawn into the structure of the plan. She will never know that she
has been Controlled, and will be all the better for it, since her Control involved the development
of a precocious and intelligent personality."
The First Speaker laughed shortly, "In a sense, it is the irony of it all that is most amazing. For
four hundred years, so many men have been blinded by Seldon's words 'the other end of the
Galaxy.' They have brought their own peculiar, physical-science thought to the problem,
measuring off the other end with protractors and rulers, ending up eventually either at a point in
the periphery one hundred eighty degrees around the rim of the Galaxy, or back at the original
point.
"Yet our very greatest danger lay in the fact that there was a possible solution based on
physical modes of thought. The Galaxy, you know, is not simply a flat ovoid of any sort; nor is
the periphery a closed curve. Actually, it is a double spiral, with at least eighty percent of the
inhabited planets on the Main Arm. Terminus is the extreme outer end of the spiral arm, and we
are at the other – since, what is the opposite end of a spiral? Why, the center.
"But that is trifling. It is an accidental and irrelevant solution. The solution could have been
reached immediately, if the questioners had but remembered that Hari Seldon was a social
scientist not a physical scientist and adjusted their thought processes accordingly. What could
'opposite ends’ mean to a social scientist? Opposite ends on the map? Of course not. That's
the mechanical interpretation only.
"The First Foundation was at the periphery, where the original Empire was weakest, where its
civilizing influence was least, where its wealth and culture were most nearly absent. And where
is the social opposite end of the Galaxy? Why, at the place where the original Empire was
strongest, where its civilizing influence was most, where its wealth and culture were most
strongly present.
"Here! At the center! At Trantor, capital of the Empire of Seldon's time.
"And it is so inevitable. Hari Seldon left the Second Foundation behind him to maintain,
improve, and extend his work That has been known, or guessed at, for fifty years. But where
could that best be done? At Trantor, where Seldon's group had worked, and where the data of
decades had been accumulated. And it was the purpose of the Second Foundation to protect
the Plan against enemies. That, too, was known! And where was the source of greatest danger
to Terminus and the Plan?
"Here! Here at Trantor, where the Empire dying though it was, could, for three centuries, still
destroy the Foundation, if it could only have decided to do so.
"Then when Trantor fell and was sacked and utterly destroyed, a short century ago, we were
naturally able to protect our headquarters, and, on all the planet, the Imperial Library and the
grounds about it remained untouched. This was well-known to the Galaxy, but even that
apparently overwhelming hint passed them by.
"It was here at Trantor that Ebling Mis discovered us; and here that we saw to it that he did not
survive the discovery. To do so, it was necessary to arrange to have a normal Foundation girl
defeat the tremendous mutant powers of the Mule. Surely, such a phenomenon might have
attracted suspicion to the planet on which it happened– It was here that we first studied the
Mule and planned his ultimate defeat. It was here that Arcadia was born and the train of events
begun that led to the great return to the Seldon Plan.
"And all those flaws in our secrecy; those gaping holes; remained unnoticed because Seldon
had spoken of 'the other end’ in his way, and they had interpreted it in their way."
The First Speaker had long since stopped speaking to the Student. It was an exposition to
himself, really, as he stood before the window, looking up at the incredible blaze of the
firmament, at the huge Galaxy that was now safe forever.
"Hari Seldon called Trantor, 'Star's End,’" he whispered, "and why not that bit of poetic imagery.
All the universe was once guided from this rock; all the apron strings of the stars led here. 'All
roads lead to Trantor,' says the old proverb, 'and that is where all stars end.'"
Ten months earlier, the First Speaker had viewed those same crowding stars – nowhere as
crowded as at the center of that huge cluster of matter Man calls the Galaxy – with misgivings;
but now there was a somber satisfaction on the round and ruddy face of Preem Palver – First
Speaker.