

Looking for Alaska
Before
one hundred
thirty-six days
before
The week before I left my family and
Florida and the rest of my minor life to
go to boarding school in Alabama, my
mother insisted on throwing me a goingaway
party. To say that I had low
expectations would be to underestimate
the matter dramatically. Although I was
more or less forced to invite all my
"school friends," i.e., the ragtag bunch of
drama people and English geeks I sat
with by social necessity in the cavernous
cafeteria of my public school, I knew
they wouldn't come. Still, my mother
persevered, awash in the delusion that I
had kept my popularity secret from her
all these years. She cooked a small
mountain of artichoke dip. She festooned
our living room in green and yellow
streamers, the colors of my new school.
She bought two dozen champagne
poppers and placed them around the
edge of our coffee table.
And when that final Friday came,
when my packing was mostly done, she
sat with my dad and me on the livingroom
couch at 4:56 p.m. and patiently
awaited the arrival of the Good-bye to
Miles Cavalry. Said cavalry consisted
of exactly two people: Marie Lawson, a
tiny blonde with rectangular glasses, and
her chunky (to put it charitably)
boyfriend, Will.
"Hey, Miles," Marie said as she sat
down.
"Hey," I said.
"How was your summer?" Will
asked.
"Okay. Yours?"
"Good. We did Jesus Christ
Superstar. I helped with the sets. Marie
did lights," said Will.
"That's cool." I nodded knowingly,
and that about exhausted our
conversational topics. I might have
asked a question about Jesus Christ
Superstar, except that 1 . I didn't know
what it was, and 2. I didn't care to learn,
and 3 . I never really excelled at small
talk. My mom, however, can talk small
for hours, and so she extended the
awkwardness by asking them about their
rehearsal schedule, and how the show
had gone, and whether it was a success.
"I guess it was," Marie said. "A lot
of people came, I guess." Marie was the
sort of person to guess a lot.
Finally, Will said, "Well, we just
dropped by to say good-bye. I've got to
get Marie home by six. Have fun at
boarding school, Miles."
"Thanks," I answered, relieved. The
only thing worse than having a party that
no one attends is having a party attended
only by two vastly, deeply uninteresting
people.
They left, and so I sat with my
parents and stared at the blank TV and
wanted to turn it on but knew I shouldn't.
I could feel them both looking at me,
waiting for me to burst into tears or
something, as if I hadn't known all along
that it would go precisely like this. But I
had known. I could feel their pity as they
scooped artichoke dip with chips
intended for my imaginary friends, but
they needed pity more than I did: I
wasn't disappointed. My expectations
had been met.
"Is this why you want to leave,
Miles?" Mom asked.
I mulled it over for a moment,
careful not to look at her. "Uh, no," I
said. "Well, why then?" she asked. This
was not the first time she had posed the
question. Mom was not particularly keen
on letting me go to boarding school and
had made no secret of it.
"Because of me?" my dad asked. He
had attended Culver Creek, the same
boarding school to which I was headed,
as had both of his brothers and all of
their kids. I think he liked the idea of me
following in his footsteps. My uncles
had told me stories about how famous
my dad had been on campus for having
simultaneously raised hell and aced all
his classes. That sounded like a better
life than the one I had in Florida. But no,
it wasn't because of Dad. Not exactly.
"Hold on," I said. I went into Dad's
study and found his biography of
Frangois Rabelais. I liked reading
biographies of writers, even if (as was
the case with Monsieur Rabelais) I'd
never read any of their actual writing.
I flipped to the back and found the
highlighted quote ("NEVER USE A
HIGHLIGHTER IN MY BOOKS," my
dad had told me a thousand times. But
how else are you supposed to find what
you're looking for?).
"So this guy," I said, standing in the
doorway of the living room.
"Francois Rabelais. He was this
poet. And his last words were 'I go to
seek a Great Perhaps.' That's why I'm
going. So I don't have to wait until I die
to start seeking a Great Perhaps."
And that quieted them. I was after a
Great Perhaps, and they knew as well as
I did that I wasn't going to find it with
the likes of Will and Marie. I sat back
down on the couch, between my mom
and my dad, and my dad put his arm
around me, and we stayed there like that,
quiet on the couch together, for a long
time, until it seemed okay to turn on the
TV, and then we ate artichoke dip for
dinner and watched the History Channel,
and as going-away parties go, it
certainly could have been worse.
one hundred
twenty-eight days
before
Florida was plenty hot,certainly, and
humid, too. Hot enough that your clothes
stuck to you like Scotch tape, and sweat
dripped like tears from your forehead
into your eyes. But it was only hot
outside, and generally I only went
outside to walk from one air-conditioned
location to another.
This did not prepare me for the
unique sort of heat that one encounters
fifteen miles south of Birmingham,
Alabama, at Culver Creek Preparatory
School. My parents' SUV was parked in
the grass just a few feet outside my dorm
room, Room 43. But each time I took
those few steps to and from the car to
unload what now seemed like far too
much stuff, the sun burned through my
clothes and into my skin with a vicious
ferocity that made me genuinely fear
hellfire.
Between Mom and Dad and me, it
only took a few minutes to unload the
car, but my unair-conditioned dorm
room, although blessedly out of the
sunshine, was only modestly cooler. The
room surprised me: I'd pictured plush
carpet, wood-paneled walls, Victorian
furniture. Aside from one luxury — a
private bathroom — I got a box.
With cinder-block walls coated thick
with layers of white paint and a greenand-
white-checkered linoleum floor, the
place looked more like a hospital than
the dorm room of my fantasies. A bunk
bed of unfinished wood with vinyl
mattresses was pushed against the
room's back window. The desks and
dressers and bookshelves were all
attached to the walls in order to prevent
creative floor planning. And no airconditioning.
I sat on the lower bunk while Mom
opened the trunk, grabbed a stack of the
biographies my dad had agreed to part
with, and placed them on the
bookshelves.
"I can unpack, Mom," I said. My dad
stood. He was ready to go.
"Let me at least make your bed,"
Mom said.
"No, really. I can do it. It's okay."
Because you simply cannot draw these
things out forever. At some point, you
just pull off the Band-Aid and it hurts,
but then it's over and you're relieved.
"God, we'll miss you," Mom said
suddenly, stepping through the minefield
of suitcases to get to the bed. I stood and
hugged her.
My dad walked over, too, and we
formed a sort of huddle. It was too hot,
and we were too sweaty, for the hug to
last terribly long. I knew I ought to cry,
but I'd lived with my parents for sixteen
years, and a trial separation seemed
overdue.
"Don't worry." I smiled. "I's a-gonna
learn how t'talk right Southern." Mom
laughed.
"Don't do anything stupid," my dad
said. "Okay."
"No drugs. No drinking. No
cigarettes." As an alumnus of Culver
Creek, he had done the things I had only
heard about: the secret parties, streaking
through hay fields (he always whined
about how it was all boys back then),
drugs, drinking, and cigarettes. It had
taken him a while to kick smoking, but
his badass days were now well behind
him.
"I love you," they both blurted out
simultaneously. It needed to be said, but
the words made the whole thing horribly
uncomfortable, like watching your
grandparents kiss.
"I love you, too. I'll call every
Sunday." Our rooms had no phone lines,
but my parents had requested I be placed
in a room near one of Culver Creek's
five pay phones.
They hugged me again — Mom, then
Dad — and it was over. Out the back
window, I watched them drive the
winding road off campus. I should have
felt a gooey, sentimental sadness,
perhaps. But mostly I just wanted to cool
off, so I grabbed one of the desk chairs
and sat down outside my door in the
shade of the overhanging eaves, waiting
for a breeze that never arrived. The air
outside sat as still and oppressive as the
air inside. I stared out over my new
digs: Six one-story buildings, each with
sixteen dorm rooms, were arranged in a
hexagram around a large circle of grass.
It looked like an oversize old motel.
Everywhere, boys and girls hugged and
smiled and walked together. I vaguely
hoped that someone would come up and
talk to me. I imagined the conversation:
"Hey. Is this your first year?"
"Yeah. Yeah. I'm from Florida."
"That's cool. So you're used to the
heat."
"I wouldn't be used to this heat if I
were from Hades," I'd joke. I'd make a
good first impression. Oh, he's funny.
That guy Miles is a riot.
That didn't happen, of course. Things
never happened like I imagined them.
Bored, I went back inside, took off
my shirt, lay down on the heat-soaked
vinyl of the lower bunk mattress, and
closed my eyes. I'd never been born
again with the baptism and weeping and
all that, but it couldn't feel much better
than being born again as a guy with no
known past. I thought of the people I'd
read about — JohnF.
Kennedy, James Joyce, Humphrey
Bogart — who went to boarding school,
and their adventures — Kennedy, for
example, loved pranks. I thought of the
Great Perhaps and the things that might
happen and the people I might meet and
who my roommate might be (I'd gotten a
letter a few weeks before that gave me
his name, Chip Martin, but no other
information). Whoever Chip Martin was,
I hoped to God he would bring an
arsenal of high-powered fans, because I
hadn't packed even one, and I could
already feel my sweat pooling on the
vinyl mattress, which disgusted me so
much that I stopped thinking and got off
my ass to find a towel to wipe up the
sweat with. And then I thought, Well,
before the adventure comes the
unpacking.
I managed to tape a map of the world
to the wall and get most of my clothes
into drawers before I noticed that the
hot, moist air made even the walls
sweat, and I decided that now was not
the time for manual labor. Now was the
time for a magnificently cold shower.
The small bathroom contained a
huge, full-length mirror behind the door,
and so I could not escape the reflection
of my naked self as I leaned in to turn on
the shower faucet. My skinniness always
surprised me: My thin arms didn't seem
to get much bigger as they moved from
wrist to shoulder, my chest lacked any
hint of either fat or muscle, and I felt
embarrassed and wondered if something
could be done about the mirror. I pulled
open the plain white shower curtain and
ducked into the stall.
Unfortunately, the shower seemed to
have been designed for someone
approximately three feet, seven inches
tall, so the cold water hit my lower rib
cage — with all the force of a dripping
faucet. To wet my sweat-soaked face, I
had to spread my legs and squat
significantly. Surely, John F. Kennedy
(who was six feet tall according to his
biography, my height exactly) did not
have to squat at his boarding school.
No, this was a different beast entirely,
and as the dribbling shower slowly
soaked my body, I wondered whether I
could find a Great Perhaps here at all or
whether I had made a grand
miscalculation.
When I opened the bathroom door
after my shower, a towel wrapped
around my waist, I saw a short, muscular
guy with a shock of brown hair. He was
hauling a gigantic army-green duffel bag
through the door of my room.
He stood five feet and nothing, but
was well-built, like a scale model of
Adonis, and with him arrived the stink of
stale cigarette smoke. Great, I thought.
I'm meeting my roommate naked. He
heaved the duffel into the room, closed
the door, and walked over to me.
"I'm Chip Martin," he announced in a
deep voice, the voice of a radio deejay.
Before I could respond, he added, "I'd
shake your hand, but I think you should
hold on damn tight to that towel till you
can get some clothes on."
I laughed and nodded my head at him
(that's cool, right? the nod?) and said,
"I'm Miles Halter. Nice to meet you."
"Miles, as in 'to go before I sleep'?"
he asked me.
"Huh?"
"It's a Robert Frost poem. You've
never read him?"
I shook my head no.
"Consider yourself lucky." He
smiled.
I grabbed some clean underwear, a
pair of blue Adidas soccer shorts, and a
white T-shirt, mumbled that I'd be back
in a second, and ducked back into the
bathroom. So much for a good first
impression.
"So where are your parents?" I asked
from the bathroom.
"My parents? The father's in
California right now. Maybe sitting in
his La-Z-Boy. Maybe driving his truck.
Either way, he's drinking. My mother is
probably just now turning off campus."
"Oh," I said, dressed now, not sure
how to respond to such personal
information. I shouldn't have asked, I
guess, if I didn't want to know.
Chip grabbed some sheets and
tossed them onto the top bunk. "I'm a top
bunk man. Hope that doesn't bother you."
"Uh, no. Whatever is fine."
"I see you've decorated the place,"
he said, gesturing toward the world map.
"I like it."
And then he started naming
countries. He spoke in a monotone, as if
he'd done it a thousand times before.
Afghanistan.
Albania.
Algeria.
American Samoa.
Andorra.
And so on. He got through the A's
before looking up and noticing my
incredulous stare.
"I could do the rest, but it'd probably
bore you. Something I learned over the
summer. God, you can't imagine how
boring New Hope, Alabama, is in the
summertime. Like watching soybeans
grow. Where are you from, by the way?"
"Florida," I said.
"Never been."
"That's pretty amazing, the countries
thing," I said.
"Yeah, everybody's got a talent. I can
memorize things. And you can…?"
"Urn, I know a lot of people's last
words." It was an indulgence, learning
last words. Other people had chocolate;
I had dying declarations.
"Example?"
"I like Henrik Ibsen's. He was a
playwright." I knew a lot about Ibsen,
but I'd never read any of his plays. I
didn't like reading plays. I liked reading
biographies.
"Yeah, I know who he was," said
Chip.
"Right, well, he'd been sick for a
while and his nurse said to him, 'You
seem to be feeling better this morning/
and Ibsen looked at her and said, Òn the
contrary,' and then he died."
Chip laughed. "That's morbid. But I
like it."
He told me he was in his third year
at Culver Creek. He had started in ninth
grade, the first year at the school, and
was now a junior like me. A scholarship
kid, he said. Got a full ride. He'd heard
it was the best school in Alabama, so he
wrote his application essay about how
he wanted to go to a school where he
could read long books. The problem, he
said in the essay, was that his dad would
always hit him with the books in his
house, so Chip kept his books short and
paperback for his own safety. His
parents got divorced his sophomore
year. He liked "the Creek," as he called
it, but "You have to be careful here, with
students and with teachers. And I do hate
being careful." He smirked. I hated being
careful, too — or wanted to, at least.
He told me this while ripping
through his duffel bag, throwing clothes
into drawers with reckless abandon.
Chip did not believe in having a sock
drawer or a T-shirt drawer. He believed
that all drawers were created equal and
filled each with whatever fit. My mother
would have died.
As soon as he finished "unpacking,"
Chip hit me roughly on the shoulder,
said, "I hope you're stronger than you
look," and walked out the door, leaving
it open behind him. He peeked his head
back in a few seconds later and saw me
standing still. "Well, come on, Miles To
Go Halter. We got shit to do."
We made our way to the TV room,
which according to Chip contained the
only cable TV on campus. Over the
summer, it served as a storage unit.
Packed nearly to the ceiling with
couches, fridges, and rolled-up carpets,
the TV room undulated with kids trying
to find and haul away their stuff. Chip
said hello to a few people but didn't
introduce me. As he wandered through
the couch-stocked maze, I stood near the
room's entrance, trying my best not to
block pairs of roommates as they
maneuvered furniture through the narrow
front door.
It took ten minutes for Chip to find
his stuff, and an hour more for us to
make four trips back and forth across the
dorm circle between the TV room and
Room 43. By the end, I wanted to crawl
into Chip's minifridge and sleep for a
thousand years, but Chip seemed immune
to both fatigue and heatstroke. I sat down
on his couch.
"I found it lying on a curb in my
neighborhood a couple years ago," he
said of the couch as he worked on setting
up my PlayStation 2 on top of his
footlocker. "I know the leather's got
some cracks, but come on. That's a damn
nice couch." The leather had more than a
few cracks — it was about 30 percent
baby blue faux leather and 70 percent
foam — but it felt damn good to me
anyway.
"All right," he said. "We're about
done." He walked over to his desk and
pulled a roll of duct tape from a drawer.
"We just need your trunk."
I got up, pulled the trunk out from
under the bed, and Chip situated it
between the couch and the PlayStation 2
and started tearing off thin strips of duct
tape. He applied them to the trunk so that
they spelled outcoffee table.
"There," he said. He sat down and
put his feet up on the, uh, coffee table.
"Done."
I sat down next to him, and he looked
over at me and suddenly said, "Listen.
I'm not going to be your entree to Culver
Creek social life."
"Uh, okay," I said, but I could hear
the words catch in my throat. I'd just
carried this guy's couch beneath a whitehot
sun and now he didn't like me?
"Basically you've got two groups
here," he explained, speaking with
increasing urgency. "You've got the
regular boarders, like me, and then
you've got the Weekday Warriors; they
board here, but they're all rich kids who
live in Birmingham and go home to their
parents' air-conditioned mansions every
weekend. Those are the cool kids. I don't
like them, and they don't like me, and so
if you came here thinking that you were
hot shit at public school so you'll be hot
shit here, you'd best not be seen with me.
You did go to public school, didn't
you?"
"Uh…" I said. Absentmindedly, I
began picking at the cracks in the couch's
leather, digging my fingers into the
foamy whiteness.
"Right, you did, probably, because if
you had gone to a private school your
freakin' shorts would fit." He laughed.
I wore my shorts just below my hips,
which I thought was cool. Finally I said,
"Yeah, I went to public school. But I
wasn't hot shit there, Chip. I was regular
shit."
"Ha! That's good. And don't call me
Chip. Call me the Colonel."
I stifled a laugh. "The Colonel?"
"Yeah. The Colonel. And we'll call
you…hmm. Pudge."
"Huh?"
"Pudge," the Colonel said. "Because
you're skinny. It's called irony, Pudge.
Heard of it? Now, let's go get some
cigarettes and start this year off right."
He walked out of the room, again
just assuming I'd follow, and this time I
did. Mercifully, the sun was descending
toward the horizon. We walked five
doors down to Room 48. A dry-erase
board was taped to the door using duct
tape. In blue marker, it read: Alaska has
a single!
The Colonel explained to me that 1.
this was Alaska's room, and that 2. she
had a single room because the girl who
was supposed to be her roommate got
kicked out at the end of last year, and
that 3 . Alaska had cigarettes, although
the Colonel neglected to ask whether 4. I
smoked, which 5. I didn't.
He knocked once, loudly. Through
the door, a voice screamed, "Oh my God
come in you short little man because I
have the best story."
We walked in. I turned to close the
door behind me, and the Colonel shook
his head and said, "After seven, you
have to leave the door open if you're in a
girl's room," but I barely heard him
because the hottest girl in all of human
history was standing before me in cutoff
jeans and a peach tank top. And she was
talking over the Colonel, talking loud
and fast.
"So first day of summer, I'm in grand
old Vine Station with this boy named
Justin and we're at his house watching
TV on the couch — and mind you, I'm
already dating Jake — actually I'm still
dating him, miraculously enough, but
Justin is a friend of mine from when I
was a kid and so we're watching TV and
literally chatting about the SATs or
something, and Justin puts his arm
around me and I think, Oh that's nice,
we've been friends for so long and this
is totally comfortable, and we're just
chatting and then I'm in the middle of a
sentence about analogies or something
and like a hawk he reaches down and he
honks my boob. HONK. A much-toofirm,
two-to three-second HONK. And
the first thing I thought was Okay, how
do I extricate this claw from my boob
before it leaves permanent marks? and
the second thing I thought was God, I
can't wait to tell Takumi and the
Colonel."
The Colonel laughed. I stared,
stunned partly by the force of the voice
emanating from the petite (but God,
curvy) girl and partly by the gigantic
stacks of books that lined her walls. Her
library filled her bookshelves and then
overflowed into waist-high stacks of
books everywhere, piled haphazardly
against the walls. If just one of them
moved, I thought, the domino effect
could engulf the three of us in an
asphyxiating mass of literature.
"Who's the guy that's not laughing at
my very funny story?" she asked.
"Oh, right. Alaska, this is Pudge.
Pudge memorizes people's last words.
Pudge, this is Alaska. She got her boob
honked over the summer." She walked
over to me with her hand extended, then
made a quick move downward at the last
moment and pulled down my shorts.
"Those are the biggest shorts in the
state of Alabama!"
"I like them baggy," I said,
embarrassed, and pulled them up. They
had been cool back home in Florida.
"So far in our relationship, Pudge,
I've seen your chicken legs entirely too
often," the Colonel deadpanned. "So,
Alaska. Sell us some cigarettes." And
then somehow, the Colonel talked me
into paying five dollars for a pack of
Marlboro Lights I had no intention of
ever smoking. He asked Alaska to join
us, but she said, "I have to find Takumi
and tell him about The Honk." She
turned to me and asked, "Have you seen
him?" I had no idea whether I'd seen
Takumi, since I had no idea who he was.
I just shook my head.
"All right. Meet ya at the lake in a
few minutes, then." The Colonel nodded.
At the edge of the lake, just before
the sandy (and, the Colonel told me,
fake) beach, we sat down in an
Adirondack swing. I made the obligatory
joke: "Don't grab my boob." The
Colonel gave an obligatory laugh, then
asked, "Want a smoke?" I had never
smoked a cigarette, but when in Rome…
"Is it safe here?"
"Not really," he said, then lit a
cigarette and handed it to me. I inhaled.
Coughed. Wheezed. Gasped for breath.
Coughed again. Considered
vomiting. Grabbed the swinging bench,
head spinning, and threw the cigarette to
the ground and stomped on it, convinced
my Great Perhaps did not involve
cigarettes.
"Smoke much?" He laughed, then
pointed to a white speck across the lake
and said, "See that?"
"Yeah," I said. "What is that? A
bird?"
"It's the swan," he said.
"Wow. A school with a swan.
Wow."
"That swan is the spawn of Satan.
Never get closer to it than we are now."
"Why?"
"It has some issues with people. It
was abused or something. It'll rip you to
pieces. The Eagle put it there to keep us
from walking around the lake to smoke."
"The Eagle?"
"Mr. Starnes. Code name: the Eagle.
The dean of students. Most of the
teachers live on campus, and they'll all
bust you. But only the Eagle lives in the
dorm circle, and he sees all. He can
smell a cigarette from like five miles."
"Isn't his house back there?" I asked,
pointing to it. I could see the house quite
clearly despite the darkness, so it
followed he could probably see us.
"Yeah, but he doesn't really go into
blitzkrieg mode until classes start," Chip
said nonchalantly.
"God, if I get in trouble my parents
will kill me," I said.
"I suspect you're exaggerating. But
look, you're going to get in trouble.
Ninety-nine percent of the time, your
parents never have to know, though. The
school doesn't want your parents to think
you became a fuckup here any more than
you want your parents to think you're a
fuckup." He blew a thin stream of smoke
forcefully toward the lake. I had to
admit: He looked cool doing it. Taller,
somehow. "Anyway, when you get in
trouble, just don't tell on anyone. I mean,
I hate the rich snots here with a fervent
passion I usually reserve only for dental
work and my father. But that doesn't
mean I would rat them out. Pretty much
the only important thing is never never
never never rat."
"Okay," I said, although I wondered:
If someone punches me in the face, I'm
supposed to insist that I ran into a
door? It seemed a little stupid. How do
you deal with bullies and assholes if you
can't get them into trouble? I didn't ask
Chip, though.
"All right, Pudge. We have reached
the point in the evening when I'm obliged
to go and find my girlfriend. So give me
a few of those cigarettes you'll never
smoke anyway, and I'll see you later."
I decided to hang out on the swing
for a while, half because the heat had
finally dissipated into a pleasant, if
muggy, eighty-something, and half
because I thought Alaska might show up.
But almost as soon as the Colonel left,
the bugs encroached: no-see-ums
(which, for the record, you can see) and
mosquitoes hovered around me in such
numbers that the tiny noise of their
rubbing wings sounded cacophonous.
And then I decided to smoke.
Now, I did think, The smoke will
drive the bugs away. And, to some
degree, it did. I'd be lying, though, if I
claimed I became a smoker to ward off
insects. I became a smoker because 1. I
was on an Adirondack swing by myself,
and 2. I had cigarettes, and 3. I figured
that if everyone else could smoke a
cigarette without coughing, I could damn
well, too. In short, I didn't have a very
good reason. So yeah, let's just say that
4. it was the bugs.
I made it through three entire drags
before I felt nauseous and dizzy and only
semipleasantly buzzed. I got up to leave.
As I stood, a voice behind me said: "So
do you really memorize last words?"
She ran up beside me and grabbed
my shoulder and pushed me back onto
the porch swing.
"Yeah," I said. And then hesitantly, I
added, "You want to quiz me?"
"JFK," she said.
"That's obvious," I answered.
"Oh, is it now?" she asked.
"No. Those were his last words.
Someone said, `Mr. President, you can't
say Dallas doesn't love you,' and then he
said, 'That's obvious,' and then he got
shot."
She laughed. "God, that's awful. I
shouldn't laugh. But I will," and then she
laughed again. "Okay, Mr. Famous Last
Words Boy. I have one for you." She
reached into her overstuffed backpack
and pulled out a book. "Gabriel Garcia
M a r q ue z . The General in His
Labyri nt h. Absolutely one of my
favorites. It's about Simon Bolivar." I
didn't know who Simon Bolivar was, but
she didn't give me time to ask. "It's a
historical novel, so I don't know if this is
true, but in the book, do you know what
his last words are? No, you don't. But I
am about to tell you, Senor Parting
Remarks."
And then she lit a cigarette and
sucked on it so hard for so long that I
thought the entire thing might burn off in
one drag. She exhaled and read to me:
"'He'—that's Simon Bolivar—*was
shaken by the overwhelming revelation
that the headlong race between his
misfortunes and his dreams was at that
moment reaching the finish line. The rest
was darkness. "Damn it," he sighed.
"How will I ever get out of this
labyrinth!'"" I knew great last words
when I heard them, and I made a mental
note to get a hold of a biography of this
Simon Bolivar fellow. Beautiful last
words, but I didn't quite understand. "So
what's the labyrinth?" I asked her.
And now is as good a time as any to
say that she was beautiful. In the dark
beside me, she smelled of sweat and
sunshine and vanilla, and on that thinmooned
night I could see little more than
her silhouette except for when she
smoked, when the burning cherry of the
cigarette washed her face in pale red
light. But even in the dark, I could see
her eyes — fierce emeralds. She had the
kind of eyes that predisposed you to
supporting her every endeavor. And not
just beautiful, but hot, too, with her
breasts straining against her tight tank
top, her curved legs swinging back and
forth beneath the swing, flip-flops
dangling from her electric-blue-painted
toes. It was right then, between when I
asked about the labyrinth and when she
answered me, that I realized the
importance of curves, of the thousand
places where girls' bodies ease from one
place to another, from arc of the foot to
ankle to calf, from calf to hip to waist to
breast to neck to ski-slope nose to
forehead to shoulder to the concave arch
of the back to the butt to the etc. I'd
noticed curves before, of course, but I
had never quite apprehended their
significance.
Her mouth close enough to me that I
could feel her breath warmer than the
air, she said, "That's the mystery, isn't it?
Is the labyrinth living or dying? Which is
he trying to escape — the world or the
end of it?" I waited for her to keep
talking, but after a while it became
obvious she wanted an answer.
"Uh, I don't know," I said finally.
"Have you really read all those books in
your room?"
She laughed. "Oh God no. I've
maybe read a third of 'em. But I'm going
to read them all. I call it my Life's
Library. Every summer since I was little,
I've gone to garage sales and bought all
the books that looked interesting. So I
always have something to read. But there
is so much to do: cigarettes to smoke,
sex to have, swings to swing on. I'll have
more time for reading when I'm old and
boring."
She told me that I reminded her of
the Colonel when he came to Culver
Creek. They were freshmen together, she
said, both scholarship kids with, as she
put it, "a shared interest in booze and
mischief." The phrase booze and
mischief left me worrying I'd stumbled
into what my mother referred to as "the
wrong crowd," but for the wrong crowd,
they both seemed awfully smart. As she
lit a new cigarette off the butt of her
previous one, she told me that the
Colonel was smart but hadn't done much
living when he got to the Creek.
"I got rid of that problem quickly."
She smiled. "By November, I'd gotten
him his first girlfriend, a perfectly nice
non-Week day Warrior named Janice.
He dumped her after a month because
she was too rich for his poverty-soaked
blood, but whatever. We pulled our first
prank that year — we filled Classroom 4
with a thin layer of marbles. We've
progressed some since then, of course."
She laughed. So Chip became the
Colonel — the military-style planner of
their pranks, and Alaska was ever
Alaska, the larger-than-life creative
force behind them.
"You're smart like him," she said.
"Quieter, though. And cuter, but I didn't
even just say that, because I love my
boyfriend."
"Yeah, you're not bad either," I said,
overwhelmed by her compliment. "But I
didn't just say that, because I love my
girlfriend. Oh, wait. Right. I don't have
one."
She laughed. "Yeah, don't worry,
Pudge. If there's one thing I can get you,
it's a girlfriend. Let's make a deal: You
figure out what the labyrinth is and how
to get out of it, and I'll get you laid."
"Deal." We shook on it.
Later, I walked toward the dorm
circle beside Alaska. The cicadas
hummed their one-note song, just as they
had at home in Florida. She turned to me
as we made our way through the
darkness and said, "When you're
walking at night, do you ever get
creeped out and even though it's silly
and embarrassing you just want to run
home?"
It seemed too secret and personal to
admit to a virtual stranger, but I told her,
"Yeah, totally."
For a moment, she was quiet. Then
she grabbed my hand, whispered, "Run
run run run run," and took off, pulling me
behind her.
one hundred
twenty-seven days
before
Early the next afternoon,I blinked
sweat from my eyes as I taped a van
Gogh poster to the back of the door. The
Colonel sat on the couch judging
whether the poster was level and
fielding my endless questions about
Alaska.
What's her story? "She's from Vine
Station. You could drive past it without
noticing — and from what I understand,
you ought to. Her boyfriend's at
Vanderbilt on scholarship. Plays bass in
some band. Don't know much about her
family." So she really likes him? "I
guess. She hasn't cheated on him, which
is a first." And so on.
All morning, I'd been unable to care
about anything else, not the van Gogh
poster and not video games and not even
my class schedule, which the Eagle had
brought by that morning. He introduced
himself, too: "Welcome to Culver Creek,
Mr. Halter. You're given a large
measure of freedom here. If you abuse it,
you'll regret it. You seem like a nice
young man. I'd hate to have to bid you
farewell."
And then he stared at me in a manner
that was either serious or seriously
malicious. "Alaska calls that the Look of
Doom," the Colonel told me after the
Eagle left. "The next time you see that,
you're busted."
"Okay, Pudge," the Colonel said as I
stepped away from the poster. Not
entirely level, but close enough. "Enough
with the Alaska already. By my count,
there are ninety-two girls at this school,
and every last one of them is less crazy
than Alaska, who, I might add, already
has a boyfriend. I'm going to lunch. It's
bufriedo day." He walked out, leaving
the door open. Feeling like an
overinfatuated idiot, I got up to close the
door. The Colonel, already halfway
across the dorm circle, turned around.
"Christ. Are you coming or what?"
You can say a lot of bad things about
Alabama, but you can't say that
Alabamans as a people are unduly afraid
of deep fryers. In that first week at the
Creek, the cafeteria served fried
chicken, chicken-fried steak, and fried
okra, which marked my first foray into
the delicacy that is the fried vegetable. I
half expected them to fry the iceberg
lettuce. But nothing matched the
bufriedo, a dish created by Maureen, the
amazingly (and understandably) obese
Culver Creek cook. A deep-fried bean
burrito, the bufriedo proved beyond the
shadow of a doubt that frying always
improves a food. Sitting with the
Colonel and five guys I didn't know at a
circular table in the cafeteria that
afternoon, I sank my teeth into the
crunchy shell of my first bufriedo and
experienced a culinary orgasm. My mom
cooked okay, but I immediately wanted
to bring Maureen home with me over
Thanksgiving.
The Colonel introduced me (as
"Pudge") to the guys at the wobbly
wooden table, but I only registered the
name Takumi, whom Alaska had
mentioned yesterday. A thin Japanese
guy only a few inches taller than the
Colonel, Takumi talked with his mouth
full as Ichewed slowly, savoring the
beany crunch.
"God," Takumi said to me, "there's
nothing like watching a man eat his first
bufriedo."
I didn't say much — partly because
no one asked me any questions and
partly because I just wanted to eat as
much as I could. But Takumi felt no such
modesty — he could, and did, eat and
chew and swallow while talking.
The lunch discussion centered on the
girl who was supposed to have been
Alaska's roommate, Marya, and her
boyfriend, Paul, who had been a
Weekday Warrior. They'd gotten kicked
out in the last week of the previous
school year, I learned, for what the
Colonel called "the Trifecta" — they
were caught committing three of Culver
Creek's expellable offenses at once.
Lying naked in bed together ("genital
contact" being offense #1), already
drunk (#2), they were smoking a joint
(#3) when the Eagle burst in on them.
Rumors had it that someone had ratted
them out, and Takumi seemed intent on
finding out who — intent enough,
anyway, to shout about it with his mouth
jam-packed with bufriedo.
"Paul was an asshole," the Colonel
said. "I wouldn't have ratted on them, but
anyone who shacks up with a Jaguardriving
Weekday Warrior like Paul
deserves what she gets."
"Dude," Takumi responded, "yaw
guhfwend," and then he swallowed a
bite of food, "is a Weekday Warrior."
"True." The Colonel laughed. "Much
to my chagrin, that is an incontestable
fact. But she is not as big an asshole as
Paul."
"Not quite." Takumi smirked. The
Colonel laughed again, and I wondered
why he wouldn't stand up for his
girlfriend. I wouldn't have cared if my
girlfriend was a Jaguar-driving Cyclops
with a beard — I'd have been grateful
just to have someone to make out with.
That evening, when the Colonel
dropped by Room 43 to pick up the
cigarettes (he seemed to have forgotten
that they were, technically, mi ne), I
didn't really care when he didn't invite
me out with him. In public school, I'd
known plenty of people who made it a
habit to hate this kind of person or that
kind — the geeks hated the preps, etc. —
and it always seemed like a big waste of
time to me. The Colonel didn't tell me
where he'd spent the afternoon, or where
he was going to spend the evening, but
he closed the door behind him when he
left, so I guessed I wasn't welcome.
Just as well: I spent the night surfing
the Web (no porn, I swear) and reading
The Final Days, a book about Richard
Nixon and Watergate. For dinner, I
microwaved a refrigerated bufriedo the
Colonel had snuck out of the cafeteria. It
reminded me of nights in Florida —
except with better food and no airconditioning.
Lying in bed and reading
felt pleasantly familiar.
I decided to heed what I'm sure
would have been my mother's advice
and get a good night's sleep before my
first day of classes. French II started at
8:10, and figuring it couldn't take more
than eight minutes to put on some clothes
and walk to the classrooms, I set my
alarm for 8:02. I took a shower, and then
lay in bed waiting for sleep to save me
from the heat. Around 11:00, I realized
that the tiny fan clipped to my bunk might
make more of a difference if I took off
my shirt, and I finally fell asleep on top
of the sheets wearing just boxers.
A decision I found myself regretting
some hours later when I awoke to two
sweaty, meaty hands shaking the holy
hell out of me. I woke up completely and
instantly, sitting up straight in bed,
terrified, and I couldn't understand the
voices for some reason, couldn't
understand why there were any voices at
all, and what the hell time was it
anyway? And finally my head cleared
enough to hear, "C'mon, kid. Don't make
us kick your ass. Just get up," and then
from the top bunk, I heard, "Christ,
Pudge. Just get up." So I got up, and saw
for the first time three shadowy figures.
Two of them grabbed me, one with a
hand on each of my upper arms, and
walked me out of the room. On the way
out, the Colonel mumbled, "Have a good
time. Go easy on him, Kevin."
They led me, almost at a jog, behind
my dorm building, and then across the
soccer field. The ground was grassy but
gravelly, too, and I wondered why no
one had shown the common courtesy to
tell me to put on shoes, and why was I
out there in my underwear, chicken legs
exposed to the world? A thousand
humiliations crossed my mind: There's
the new junior, Miles Halter,
handcuffed to the soccer goal wearing
only his boxers. I imagined them taking
me into the woods, where we now
seemed headed, and beating the shit out
of me so that I looked great for my first
day of school. And the whole time, I just
stared at my feet, because I didn't want
to look at them and I didn't want to fall,
so I watched my steps, trying to avoid
the bigger rocks. I felt the fight-or-fIight
reflex swell up in me over and over
again, but I knew that neither fight nor
flight had ever worked for me before.
They took me a roundabout way to the
fake beach, andthen I knew what would
happen — a good, old-fashioned
dunking in the lake — and I calmed
down. I could handle that.
When we reached the beach, they
told me to put my arms at my sides, and
the beefiest guy grabbed two rolls of
duct tape from the sand. With my arms
flat against my sides like a soldier at
attention, they mummified me from my
shoulder to my wrists. Then they threw
me down on the ground; the sand from
the fake beach cushioned the landing, but
I still hit my head. Two of them pulled
my legs together while the other one —
Kevin, I'd figured output his angular,
strong-jawed face up so close to mine
that the gel-soaked spikes of hair
pointing out from his forehead poked at
my face, and told me, "This is for the
Colonel. You shouldn't hang out with
that asshole." They taped my legs
together, from ankles to thighs. I looked
like a silver mummy. I said, "Please
guys, don't," just before they taped my
mouth shut. Then they picked me up and
hurled me into the water.
Sinking. Sinking, but instead of
feeling panic or anything else, I realized
that "Please guys, don't" were terrible
last words. But then the great miracle of
the human species — our buoyancy —
came through, and as I felt myself
floating toward the surface, I twisted and
turned as best I could so that the warm
night air hit my nose first, and I breathed.
I wasn't dead and wasn't going to die.
Well,I thought, that wasn't so bad.
But there was still the small matter
of getting to shore before the sun rose.
First, to determine my position vis-avis
the shoreline. If I tilted my head too
much, I felt my whole body start to roll,
and on the long list of unpleasant ways
to die, "facedown in soaking-wet white
boxers" is pretty high up there. So
instead I rolled my eyes and craned my
neck back, my eyes almost underwater,
until I saw that the shore — not ten feet
away — was directly behind my head. I
began to swim, an armless silver
mermaid, using only my hips to generate
motion, until finally my ass scraped
against the lake's mucky bottom. I turned
then and used my hips and waist to roll
three times, until I came ashore near a
ratty green towel. They'd left me a
towel. How thoughtful.
The water had seeped under the duct
tape and loosened the adhesive's grip on
my skin, but the tape was wrapped
around me three layers deep in places,
which necessitated wiggling like a fish
out of water. Finally it loosened enough
for me to slip my left hand up and out
against my chest and rip the tape off.
I wrapped myself in the sandy towel.
I didn't want to go back to my room and
see Chip, because I had no idea what
Kevin had meant — maybe if I went
back to the room, they'd be waiting for
me and they'd get me for real; maybe I
needed to show them, "Okay. Got your
message. He's just my roommate, not my
friend." And anyway, I didn't feel
terribly friendly toward the Colonel.
Have a good time, he'd said. Yeah, I
thought. / had a ball.
So I went to Alaska's room. I didn't
know what time it was, but I could see a
faint light underneath her door. I knocked
softly.
"Yeah," she said, and I came in, wet
and sandy and wearing only a towel and
soaking boxers. This was not, obviously,
how you want the world's hottest girl to
see you, but I figured she could explain
to me what had just happened.
She put down a book and got out of
bed with a sheet wrapped around her
shoulders. For a moment, she looked
concerned. She looked like the girl I met
yesterday, the girl who said I was cute
and bubbled over with energy and
silliness and intelligence. And then she
laughed.
"Guess you went for a swim, huh?"
And she said it with such casual malice
that I felt that everyone had known, and I
wondered why the whole damn school
agreed in advance to possibly drown
Miles Halter. But Alaska liked the
Colonel, and in the confusion of the
moment, I just looked at her blankly,
unsure even of what to ask.
"Give me a break," she said. "Come
on. You know what? There are people
with real problems. I've got real
problems. Mommy ain't here, so buck
up, big guy."
I left without saying a word to her
and went to my room, slamming the door
behind me, waking the Colonel, and
stomping into the bathroom. I got in the
shower to wash the algae and the lake
off me, but the ridiculous faucet of a
shower head failed spectacularly, and
how could Alaska and Kevin and those
other guys already dislike me?
After I finished the shower, I dried
off and went into the room to find some
clothes.
"So," he said. "What took you so
long? Get lost on your way home?"
"They said it was because of you," I
said, and my voice betrayed a hint of
annoyance. "They said I shouldn't hang
out with you."
"What? No, it happens to
everybody," the Colonel said. "It
happened to me. They throw you in the
lake. You swim out. You walk home."
"I couldn't just swim out," I said
softly, pulling on a pair of jean shorts
beneath my towel. "They duct-taped me.
I couldn't even move, really."
"Wait. Wait," he said, and hopped
out of his bunk, staring at me through the
darkness. "They taped you? How?"
And I showed him: I stood like a
mummy, with my feet together and my
hands at my sides, and showed him how
they'd wrapped me up. And then I
plopped down onto the couch.
"Christ! You could have drowned!
They're just supposed to throw you in the
water in your underwear and run!"
he shouted. "What the hell were they
thinking? Who was it? Kevin Richman
and who else? Do you remember their
faces?"
"Yeah, I think."
"Why the hell would they do that?"
he wondered.
"Did you do something to them?" I
asked.
"No, but I'm sure as shit gonna do
something to 'em now. We'll get them."
"It wasn't a big deal. I got out fine."
"You could have died." And I could
have, I suppose. But I didn't.
"Well, maybe I should just go to the
Eagle tomorrow and tell him," I said.
"Absolutely not," he answered. He
walked over to his crumpled shorts lying
on the floor and pulled out a pack of
cigarettes. He lit two and handed one to
me. I smoked the whole goddamned
thing.
"You're not," he continued, "because
that's not how shit gets dealt with here.
And besides, you really don't want to get
a reputation for ratting. But we will deal
with those bastards, Pudge. I promise
you. They will regret messing with one
of my friends."
And if the Colonel thought that
calling me his friend would make me
stand by him, well, he was right.
"Alaska was kind of mean to me
tonight," I said. I leaned over, opened an
empty desk drawer, and used it as a
makeshift ashtray.
"Like I said, she's moody."
I went to bed wearing a T-shirt,
shorts, and socks. No matter how
miserably hot it got, I resolved, I would
sleep in my clothes every night at the
Creek, feeling — probably for the first
time in my life — the fear and
excitement of living in a place where
you never know what's going to happen
or when.
one hundred
twenty-six days
before
"Well,now it's war,"the Colonel
shouted the next morning. I rolled over
and looked at the clock: 7:52. My first
Culver Creek class, French, started in
eighteen minutes. I blinked a couple
times and looked up at the Colonel, who
was standing between the couch and the
coffee table, holding his well-worn,
once-white tennis shoes by the laces.
For a long time, he stared at me, and I
stared at him. And then, almost in slow
motion, a grin crept across the Colonel's
face. "I've got to hand it to them," he said
finally. "That was pretty clever."
"What?" I asked.
"Last night — before they woke you
up, I guess — they pissed in my shoes."
"Are you sure?" I said, trying not to
laugh.
"Do you care to smell?" he asked,
holding the shoes toward me.
"Because I went ahead and smelled
them, and yes, I am sure. If there's one
thing I know, it's when I've just stepped
in another man's piss. It's like my mom
always says: `Ya think you's a-walkin'
on water, but turns out you just got piss
in your shoes.' Point those guys out to me
if you see them today," he added,
"because we need to figure out why
they're so, uh, pissed at me. And then we
need to go ahead and start thinking about
how we're going to ruin their miserable
little lives."
When I received the Culver Creek
Handbook over the summer and noticed
happily that the "Dress Code" section
contained only two words, casual
modesty, it never occurred to me that
girls would show up for class half
asleep in cotton pajama shorts, T-shirts,
and flip-flops. Modest, I guess, and
casual.
And there was something about girls
wearing pajamas (even if modest),
which might have made French at 8:10
in the morning bearable, if I'd had any
idea what Madame O'Malley was
talking about. Comment dis-tu "Oh my
God, I don't know nearly enough French
to pass French II" en francais? My
French I class back in Florida did not
prepare me for Madame O'Malley, who
skipped the "how was your summer"
pleasantries and dove directly into
something called the passe compose,
which is apparently a verb tense. Alaska
sat directly across from me in the circle
of desks, but she didn't look at me once
the entire class, even though I could
notice little but her. Maybe she could be
mean…but the way she talked that first
night about getting out of the labyrinth —
so smart. And the way her mouth curled
up on the right side all the time, like she
was preparing to smirk, like she'd
mastered the right half of the Mona
Lisa's inimitable smile…
From my room, the student
population seemed manageable, but it
overwhelmed me in the classroom area,
which was a single, long building just
beyond the dorm circle. The building
was split into fourteen rooms facing out
toward the lake. Kids crammed the
narrow sidewalks in front of the
classrooms, and even though finding my
classes wasn't hard (even with my poor
sense of direction, I could get from
French in Room 3 to precalc in Room
12), I felt unsettled all day. I didn't know
anyone and couldn't even figure out
whom I should be trying to know, and
the classes were hard, even on the first
day. My dad had told me I'd have to
study, and now I believed him.
The teachers were serious and smart
and a lot of them went by "Dr.," and so
when the time came for my last class
before lunch, World Religions, I felt
tremendous relief. A vestige from when
Culver Creek was a Christian boys'
school, I figured the World Religions
class, required of every junior and
senior, might be an easy A.
It was my only class all day where
the desks weren't arranged either in a
square or a circle, so, not wanting to
seem eager, I sat down in the third row
at 11:03. I was seven minutes early,
partly because I liked to be punctual, and
partly because I didn't have anyone to
chat with out in the halls. Shortly
thereafter, the Colonel came in with
Takumi, and they sat down on opposite
sides of me.
"I heard about last night," Takumi
said. "Alaska's pissed."
"That's weird, since she was such a
bitch last night," I blurted out.
Takumi just shook his head. "Yeah,
well, she didn't know the whole story.
And people are moody, dude. You gotta
get used to living with people. You
could have worse friends than—" The
Colonel cut him off. "Enough with the
psychobabble, MC Dr. Phil. Let's talk
counterinsurgency." People were starting
to file into class, so the Colonel leaned
in toward me and whispered, "If any of
'em are in this class, let me know, okay?
Just, here, just put X's where they're
sitting," and he ripped a sheet of paper
out of his notebook and drew a square
for each desk. As people filed in, I saw
one of them — the tall one with
immaculately spiky hairKevin. Kevin
stared down the Colonel as he walked
past, but in trying to stare, he forgot to
watch his step and bumped his thigh
against a desk. The Colonel laughed.
One of the other guys, the one who was
either a little fat or worked out too much,
came in behind Kevin, sporting pleated
khaki pants and a short-sleeve black
polo shirt. As they sat down, I crossed
through the appropriate squares on the
Colonel's diagram and handed it to him.
Just then, the Old Man shuffled in.
He breathed slowly and with great
labor through his wide-open mouth. He
took tiny steps toward the lectern, his
heels not moving much past his toes. The
Colonel nudged me and pointed casually
to his notebook, which read, The Old
Man only has one lung, and I did not
doubt it. His audible, almost desperate
breaths reminded me of my grandfather
when he was dying of lung cancer.
Barrel-chested and ancient, the Old
Man, it seemed to me, might die before
he ever reached the podium.
"My name," he said, "is Dr. Hyde. I
have a first name, of course. So far as
you are concerned, it is Doctor. Your
parents pay a great deal of money so that
you can attend school here, and I expect
that you will offer them some return on
their investment by reading what I tell
you to read when I tell you to read it and
consistently attending this class. And
when you are here, you will listen to
what I say." Clearly not an easy A.
"This year, we'll be studying three
religious traditions: Islam, Christianity,
and Buddhism. We'll tackle three more
traditions next year. And in my classes, I
will talk most of the time, and you will
listen most of the time.
Because you may be smart, but I've
been smart longer. I'm sure some of you
do not like lecture classes, but as you
have probably noted, I'm not as young as
I used to be. I would love to spend my
remaining breath chatting with you about
the finer points of Islamic history, but
our time together is short. I must talk,
and you must listen, for we are engaged
here in the most important pursuit in
history: the search for meaning. What is
the nature of being a person? What is the
best way to go about being a person?
How did we come to be, and what will
become of us when we are no longer? In
short: What are the rules of this game,
and how might we best play it?"
The nature of the labyrinth,I
scribbled into my spiral notebook, and
the way out of it. This teacher rocked. I
hated discussion classes. I hated talking,
and I hated listening to everyone else
stumble on their words and try to phrase
things in the vaguest possible way so
they wouldn't sound dumb, and I hated
how it was all just a game of trying to
figure out what the teacher wanted to
hear and then saying it. I'm in class, so
teach me. And teach me he did: In those
fifty minutes, the Old Man made me take
religion seriously. I'd never been
religious, but he told us that religion is
important whether or not we believed in
one, in the same way that historical
events are important whether or not you
personally lived through them. And then
he assigned us fifty pages of reading for
the next day — from a book called
Religious Studies.
That afternoon, I had two classes and
two free periods. We had nine fiftyminute
class periods each day, which
means that most everyone had three
"study periods" (except for the Colonel,
who had an extra independent-study
math class on account of being an Extra
Special Genius). The Colonel and I had
biology together, where I pointed out the
other guy who'd duct-taped me the night
before. In the top corner of his notebook,
the Colonel wrote, Longwell Chase.
Senior W-day Warrior. Friends w/Sara.
Weird. It took me a minute to remember
who Sara was: the Colonel's girlfriend.
I spent my free periods in my room
trying to read about religion. I learned
that myth doesn't mean a lie; it means a
traditional story that tells you something
about people and their world view and
what they hold sacred.
Interesting. I also learned that after
the events of the previous night, I was
far too tired to care about myths or
anything else, so I slept on top of the
covers for most of the afternoon, until I
awoke to Alaska singing, "WAKE UP,
LITTLE PUHHHHHDGIE!" directly
into my left ear canal. I held the religion
book close up against my chest like a
small paperback security blanket.
"That was terrible," I said. "What do
I need to do to ensure that never happens
to me again?"
"Nothing you can do!" she said
excitedly. "I'm unpredictable. God, don't
you hate Dr. Hyde? Don't you? He's so
condescending."
I sat up and said, "I think he's a
genius," partly because I thought it was
true and partly because I just felt like
disagreeing with her.
She sat down on the bed. "Do you
always sleep in your clothes?"
"Yup."
"Funny," she said. "You weren't
wearing much last night." I just glared at
her.
"C'mon, Pudge. I'm teasing. You
have to be tough here. I didn't know how
bad it was — and I'm sorry, and they'll
regret it — but you have to be tough."
And then she left. That was all she had
to say on the subject. She's cute, I
thought, but you don't need to like a girl
who treats you like you're ten: You've
already got a mom.
one hundred
twenty-two days
before
After my last class of my first week
at Culver Creek, I entered Room 43 to
an unlikely sight: the diminutive and
shirtless Colonel, hunched over an
ironing board, attacking a pink buttondown
shirt. Sweat trickled down his
forehead and chest as he ironed with
great enthusiasm, his right arm pushing
the iron across the length of the shirt
with such vigor that his breathing nearly
duplicated Dr. Hyde's.
"I have a date," he explained. "This
is an emergency." He paused to catch his
breath. "Do you know" — breath—"how
to iron?"
I walked over to the pink shirt. It
was wrinkled like an old woman who'd
spent her youth sunbathing. If only the
Colonel didn't ball up his every
belonging and stuff it into random
dresser drawers. "I think you just turn it
on and press it against the shirt, right?" I
said. "I don't know. I didn't even know
we had an iron."
"We don't. It's Takumi's. But Takumi
doesn't know how to iron, either. And
when I asked Alaska, she started yelling,
`You're not going to impose the
patriarchal paradigm on me.' Oh, God, I
need to smoke. I need to smoke, but I
can't reek when I see Sara's parents.
Okay, screw it. We're going to smoke in
the bathroom with the shower on. The
shower has steam. Steam gets rid of
wrinkles, right?
"By the way," he said as I followed
him into the bathroom, "if you want to
smoke inside during the day, just turn on
the shower. The smoke follows the
steam up the vents."
Though this made no scientific sense,
it seemed to work. The shower's
shortage of water pressure and low
showerhead made it all but useless for
showering, but it worked great as a
smoke screen.
Sadly, it made a poor iron. The
Colonel tried ironing the shirt once more
("I'm just gonna push really hard and see
if that helps") and finally put it on
wrinkled. He matched the shirt with a
blue tie decorated with horizontal lines
of little pink flamingos.
"The one thing my lousy father taught
me," the Colonel said as his hands
nimbly threaded the tie into a perfect
knot, "was how to tie a tie. Which is
odd, since I can't imagine when he ever
had to wear one."
Just then, Sara knocked on the door.
I'd seen her once or twice before, but the
Colonel never introduced me to her and
didn't have a chance to that night.
"Oh. My God. Can't you at least
press your shirt?" she asked, even though
the Colonel was standing in front of the
ironing board.
"We're going out with my parents."
Sara looked awfully nice in her blue
summer dress. Her long, pale blond hair
was pulled up into a twist, with a strand
of hair falling down each side of her
face. She looked like a movie star — a
bitchy one.
"Look, I did my best. We don't all
have maids to do our ironing."
"Chip, that chip on your shoulder
makes you look even shorter."
"Christ, can't we get out the door
without fighting?"
"I'm just saying. It's the opera. It's a
big deal to my parents. Whatever. Let's
go." I felt like leaving, but it seemed
stupid to hide in the bathroom, and Sara
was standing in the doorway, one hand
cocked on her hip and the other fiddling
with her car keys as if to say, Let's go.
"I could wear a tuxedo and your
parents would still hate me!" he shouted.
"That's not my fault! You antagonize
them!" She held up the car keys in front
of him. "Look, we're going now or we're
not going."
"Fuck it. I'm not going anywhere
with you," the Colonel said.
"Fine. Have a great night." Sara
slammed the door so hard that a sizable
biography of Leo Tolstoy (last words:
"The truth is…I care a great deal…what
they…") fell off my bookshelf and
landed with a thud on our checkered
floor like an echo of the slamming door.
"AHHHHH!!!!!!!!!!!"he screamed.
"So that's Sara," I said.
"Yes."
"She seems nice."
The Colonel laughed, knelt down
next to the mini fridge, and pulled out a
gallon of milk. He opened it, took a
swig, winced, half coughed, and sat
down on the couch with the milk
between his legs.
"Is it sour or something?"
"Oh, I should have mentioned that
earlier. This isn't milk. It's five parts
milk and one part vodka. I call it
ambrosia. Drink of the gods. You can
barely smell the vodka in the milk, so the
Eagle can't catch me unless he actually
takes a sip. The downside is that it tastes
like sour milk and rubbing alcohol, but
it's Friday night, Pudge, and my
girlfriend is a bitch. Want some?"
"I think I'll pass." Aside from a few
sips of champagne on New Year's under
the watchful eye of my parents, I'd never
really drunk any alcohol, and "ambrosia"
didn't seem like the drink with which to
start. Outside, I heard the pay phone
ring. Given the fact that 190 boarders
shared five pay phones, I was amazed at
how infrequently it rang. We weren't
supposed to have cell phones, but I'd
noticed that some of the Weekday
Warriors carried them surreptitiously.
And most non-Warriors called their
parents, as I did, on a regular basis, so
parents only called when their kids
forgot.
"Are you going to get that?" the
Colonel asked me. I didn't feel like
being bossed around by him, but I also
didn't feel like fighting.
Through a buggy twilight, I walked
to the pay phone, which was drilled into
the wall between Rooms 44 and 45.
On both sides of the phone, dozens
of phone numbers and esoteric notes
were written in pen and marker
(205.555.1584; Tommy to airport
4:20;773.573.6521; JG — Kuffs?).
Calling the pay phone required a great
deal of patience. I picked up on about
the ninth ring.
"Can you get Chip for me?" Sara
asked. It sounded like she was on a cell
phone.
"Yeah, hold on."
I turned, and he was already behind
me, as if he knew it would be her. I
handed him the receiver and walked
back to the room.
A minute later, three words made
their way to our room through the thick,
still air of Alabama at almost-night.
"Screw you too!" the Colonel
shouted.
Back in the room, he sat down with
his ambrosia and told me, "She says I
ratted out Paul and Marya. That's what
the Warriors are saying. That I ratted
them out. Me. That's why the piss in the
shoes. That's why the nearly killing you.
'Cause you live with me, and they say
I'm a rat."
I tried to remember who Paul and
Marya were. The names were familiar,
but I had heard so many names in the last
week, and I couldn't match "Paul" and
"Marya" with faces. And then I
remembered why: I'd never seen them.
They got kicked out the year before,
having committed the Trifecta.
"How long have you been dating
her?" I asked.
"Nine months. We never got along. I
mean, I didn't even briefly like her. Like,
my mom and my dad — my dad would
get pissed, and then he would beat the
shit out of my mom. And then my dad
would be all nice, and they'd have like a
honeymoon period. But with Sara,
there's never a honeymoon period. God,
how could she think I was a rat? I know,
I know: Why don't we break up?" He ran
a hand through his hair, clutching a
fistful of it atop his head, and said, "I
guess I stay with her because she stays
with me. And that's not an easy thing to
do. I'm a bad boyfriend. She's a bad
girlfriend. We deserve each other."
"But-" "I can't believe they think
that," he said as he walked to the
bookshelf and pulled down the almanac.
He took a long pull off his ambrosia.
"Goddamn Weekday Warriors. It was
probably one of them that ratted out Paul
and Marya and then blamed me to cover
their tracks. Anyway, it's a good night
for staying in. Staying in with Pudge and
ambrosia."
"I still—" I said, wanting to say that
I didn't understand how you could kiss
someone who believed you were a rat if
being a rat was the worst thing in the
world, but the Colonel cut me off.
"Not another word about it. You
know what the capital of Sierra Leone
is?"
"No."
"Me neither," he said, "but I intend to
find out." And with that, he stuck his
nose in the almanac, and the
conversation was over.
one hundred ten
days before
Keeping up with my classes proved
easier than I'd expected. My general
predisposition to spending a lot of time
inside reading gave me a distinct
advantage over the average Culver
Creek student. By the third week of
classes, plenty of kids had been
sunburned to a bufriedo-like golden
brown from days spent chatting outside
in the shadeless dorm circle during free
periods. But I was barely pink: I studied.
And I listened in class, too, but on
that Wednesday morning, when Dr. Hyde
started talking about how Buddhists
believe that all things are
interconnected, I found myself staring
out the window. I was looking at the
wooded, slow-sloping hill beyond the
lake. And from Hyde's classroom, things
did seem connected: The trees seemed to
clothe the hill, and just as I would never
think to notice a particular cotton thread
in the magnificently tight orange tank top
Alaska wore that day, I couldn't see the
trees for the forest — everything so
intricately woven together that it made
no sense to think of one tree as
independent from that hill. And then I
heard my name, and I knew I was in
trouble.
"Mr. Halter," the Old Man said.
"Here I am, straining my lungs for your
edification. And yet something out there
seems to have caught your fancy in a
way that I've been unable to do. Pray
tell: What have you discovered out
there?"
Now I felt my own breath shorten,
the whole class watching me, thanking
God they weren't me. Dr. Hyde had
already done this three times, kicking
kids out of class for not paying attention
or writing notes to one another.
"Urn, I was just looking outside at
the, uh, at the hill and thinking about, um,
the trees and the forest, like you were
saying earlier, about the way—" The
Old Man, who obviously did not tolerate
vocalized rambling, cut me off. "I'm
going to ask you to leave class, Mr.
Halter, so that you can go out there and
discover the relationship between the
um-trees and the uh-forest.
And tomorrow, when you're ready to
take this class seriously, I will welcome
you back."
I sat still, my pen resting in my hand,
my notebook open, my face flushed and
my jaw jutting out into an underbite, an
old trick I had to keep from looking sad
or scared. Two rows behind me, I heard
a chair move and turned around to see
Alaska standing up, slinging her
backpack over one arm.
"I'm sorry, but that's bullshit. You
can't just throw him out of class. You
drone on and on for an hour every day,
and we're not allowed to glance out the
window?"
The Old Man stared back at Alaska
like a bull at a matador, then raised a
hand to his sagging face and slowly
rubbed the white stubble on his cheek.
"For fifty minutes a day, five days a
week, you abide by my rules. Or you
fail. The choice is yours. Both of you
leave."
I stuffed my notebook into my
backpack and walked out, humiliated.
As the door shut behind me, I felt a tap
on my left shoulder. I turned, but there
was no one there. Then I turned the other
way, and Alaska was smiling at me, the
skin between her eyes and temple
crinkled into a starburst. "The oldest
trick in the book," she said, "but
everybody falls for it."
I tried a smile, but I couldn't stop
thinking about Dr. Hyde. It was worse
than the Duct Tape Incident, because I
always knew that the Kevin Richmans of
the world didn't like me. But my teachers
had always been card-carrying members
of the Miles Halter Fan Club.
"I told you he was an asshole," she
said. "I still think he's a genius. He's right.
I wasn't listening."
"Right, but he didn't need to be a jerk
about it. Like he needs to prove his
power by humiliating you?! Anyway,"
she said, "the only real geniuses are
artists: Yeats, Picasso, Garcia Marquez:
geniuses. Dr. Hyde: bitter old man."
And then she announced we were
going to look for four-leaf clovers until
class ended and we could go smoke with
the Colonel and Takumi, "both of
whom," she added, "are big-time
assholes for not marching out of class
right behind us."
When Alaska Young is sitting with
her legs crossed in a brittle, periodically
green clover patch leaning forward in
search of four-leaf clovers, the pale skin
of her sizable cleavage clearly visible, it
is a plain fact of human physiology that it
becomes impossible to join in her clover
search. I'd gotten in enough trouble
already for looking where I wasn't
supposed to, but still…
After perhaps two minutes of
combing through a clover patch with her
long, dirty fingernails, Alaska grabbed a
clover with three full-size petals and an
undersize, runt of a fourth, then looked
up at me, barely giving me time to avert
my eyes.
"Even though you were dearly not
doing your part in the clover search,
perv," she said wryly, "I really would
give you this clover. Except luck is for
suckers." She pinched the runt petal
between the nails of her thumb and
finger and plucked it. "There," she said
to the clover as she dropped it onto the
ground. "Now you're not a genetic freak
anymore."
"Uh, thanks," I said. The bell rang,
and Takumi and the Colonel were first
out the door. Alaska stared at them.
"What?" asked the Colonel. But she
just rolled her eyes and started walking.
We followed in silence through the dorm
circle and then across the soccer field.
We ducked into the woods, following
the faint path around the lake until we
came to a dirt road. The Colonel ran up
to Alaska, and they started fighting about
something quietly enough that I couldn't
hear the words so much as the mutual
annoyance, and I finally asked Takumi
where we were headed.
"This road dead-ends into the barn,"
he said. "So maybe there. But probably
the smoking hole. You'll see."
From here, the woods were a totally
different creature than from Dr. Hyde's
classroom. The ground was thick with
fallen branches, decaying pine needles,
and brambly green bushes; the path
wound past pine trees sprouting tall and
thin, their stubbly needles providing a
lace of shade from another sunburned
day. And the smaller oak and maple
trees, which from Dr. Hyde's classroom
had been invisible beneath the more
majestic pines, showed hints of an asyet-
thermally-unforeseeable fall: Their
still-green leaves were beginning to
droop.
We came to a rickety wooden bridge
— just thick plywood laid over a
concrete foundation — over Culver
Creek, the winding rivulet that doubled
back over and over again through the
outskirts of campus. On the far side of
the bridge, there was a tiny path leading
down a steep slope. Not even a path so
much as a series of hints — a broken
branch here, a patch of stomped-down
grass there — that people had come this
way before. As we walked down single
file, Alaska, the Colonel, and Takumi
each held back a thick maple branch for
one another, passing it along until I, last
in line, let it snap back into place behind
me. And there, beneath the bridge, an
oasis. A slab of concrete, three feet
wide and ten feet long, with blue plastic
chairs stolen long ago from some
classroom. Cooled by the creek and the
shade of the bridge, I felt unhot for the
first time in weeks.
The Colonel dispensed the
cigarettes. Takumi passed; the rest of us
lit up.
"He has no right to condescend to us
is all I'm saying," Alaska said,
continuing her conversation with the
Colonel.
"Pudge is done with staring out the
window, and I'm done with going on
tirades about it, but he's a terrible
teacher, and you won't convince me
otherwise."
"Fine," the Colonel said. "Just don't
make another scene. Christ, you nearly
killed the poor old bastard."
"Seriously, you'll never win by
crossing Hyde," Takumi said.
"He'll eat you alive, shit you out, and
then piss on his dump. Which by the way
is what we should be doing to whoever
ratted on Marya. Has anyone heard
anything?"
"It must have been some Weekday
Warrior," Alaska said. "But apparently
they think it was the Colonel. So who
knows. Maybe the Eagle just got lucky.
She was stupid; she got caught; she got
expelled; it's over. That's what happens
when you're stupid and you get caught."
Alaska made an O with her lips, moving
her mouth like a goldfish eating, trying
unsuccessfully to blow smoke rings.
"Wow," Takumi said, "if I ever get
kicked out, remind me to even the score
myself, since I sure can't count on you."
"Don't be ridiculous," she
responded, not angry so much as
dismissive. "I don't understand why
you're so obsessed with figuring out
everything that happens here, like we
have to unravel every mystery. God, it's
over. Takumi, you gotta stop stealing other
people's problems and get some of your
own." Takumi started up again, but
Alaska raised her hand as if to swat the
conversation away.
I said nothing — I hadn't known
Marya, and anyway, "listening quietly"
was my general social strategy.
"Anyway," Alaska said to me. "I
thought the way he treated you was just
awful. I wanted to cry. I just wanted to
kiss you and make it better."
"Shame you didn't," I deadpanned,
and they laughed.
"You're adorable," she said, and I
felt the intensity of her eyes on me and
looked away nervously. "Too bad I love
my boyfriend." I stared at the knotted
roots of the trees on the creek bank,
trying hard not to look like I'd just been
called adorable.
Takumi couldn't believe it either,
and he walked over to me, tussling my
hair with his hand, and started rapping to
Alaska. "Yeah, Pudge is adorable / but
you want incorrigible / so Jake is more
endurable / 'cause he's sodamn. Damn. I
almost had four rhymes on adorable. But
all I could think of was unfloorable,
which isn't even a word."
Alaska laughed. "That made me not
be mad at you anymore. God, rapping is
sexy. Pudge, did you even know that
you're in the presence of the sickest
emcee in Alabama?"
"Urn, no."
"Drop a beat, Colonel Catastrophe,"
Takumi said, and I laughed at the idea
that a guy as short and dorky as the
Colonel could have a rap name. The
Colonel cupped his hands around his
mouth and started making some absurd
noises that I suppose were intended to
be beats. Puh-chi. Puh-puhpuh-chi.
Takumi laughed.
"Right here, by the river, you want
me to kick it? / If your smoke was a
Popsicle, I'd surely lick it / My rhymin'
is old school, sort of like the ancient
Romans / The Colonel's beats is sad like
Arthur Miller's Willy Loman /
Sometimes I'm accused of being a
showman / ICanRhymeFast and I can
rhyme slow, man."
He paused, took a breath, and then
finished.
"Like Emily Dickinson, I ain't afraid
of slant rhyme / And that's the end of this
verse; emcee's out on a high."
I didn't know slant rhyme from
regular rhyme, but I was suitably
impressed. We gave Takumi a soft round
of applause. Alaska finished her
cigarette and flicked it into the river.
"Why do you smoke so damn fast?" I
asked.
She looked at me and smiled widely,
and such a wide smile on her narrow
face might have looked goofy were it not
for the unimpeachably elegant green in
her eyes. She smiled with all the delight
of a kid on Christmas morning and said,
"Y'all smoke to enjoy it. I smoke to die."
one hundred nine
days before
Dinner in the cafeteria the next night
was meat loaf, one of the rare dishes that
didn't arrive deep-fried, and, perhaps as
a result, meat loaf was Maureen's
greatest failure — a stringy, gravysoaked
concoction that did not much
resemble a loaf and did not much taste
like meat. Although I'd never ridden in
it, Alaska apparently had a car, and she
offered to drive the Colonel and me to
McDonald's, but the Colonel didn't have
any money, and I didn't have much
either, what with constantly paying for
his extravagant cigarette habit.
So instead the Colonel and I
reheated two-day-old bufriedos —
unlike, say, french fries, a microwaved
bufriedo lost nothing of its taste or its
satisfying crunch — after which the
Colonel insisted on attending the Creek's
first basketball game of the season.
"Basketball in the fall?" I asked the
Colonel. "I don't know much about
sports, but isn't that when you play
football?"
"The schools in our league are too
small to have football teams, so we play
basketball in the fall. Although, man, the
Culver Creek football team would be a
thing of beauty. Your scrawny ass could
probably start at lineman.
Anyway, the basketball games are
great."
I hated sports. I hated sports, and I
hated people who played them, and I
hated people who watched them, and I
hated people who didn't hate people
who watched or played them. In third
grade — the very last year that one
could play T-ball — my mother wanted
me to make friends, so she forced me
onto the Orlando Pirates. I made friends
all right — with a bunch of
kindergartners, which didn't really
bolster my social standing with my
peers.
Primarily because I towered over the
rest of the players, I nearly made it onto
the T-ball all-star team that year.
The kid who beat me, Clay Wurtzel,
had one arm. I was an unusually tall
third grader with two arms, and I got
beat out by kindergartner Clay Wurtzel.
And it wasn't some pity-the-one-armedkid
thing, either. Clay Wurtzel could
flat-out hit, whereas I sometimes struck
out even with the ball sitting on the tee.
One of the things that appealed to me
most about Culver Creek was that my
dad assured me there was no PE
requirement.
"There is only one time when I put
aside my passionate hatred for the
Weekday Warriors and their countryclub
bullshit," the Colonel told me. "And
that's when they pump up the airconditioning
in the gym for a little oldfashioned
Culver Creek basketball. You
can't miss the first game of the year."
As we walked toward the airplane
hangar of a gym, which I had seen but
never even thought to approach, the
Colonel explained to me the most
important thing about our basketball
team: They were not very good. The
"star" of the team, the Colonel said, was
a senior named Hank Walsten, who
played power forward despite being
five-foot-eight. Hank's primary claim to
campus fame, I already knew, was that
he always had weed, and the Colonel
told me that for four years, Hank started
every game without ever once playing
sober.
"He loves weed like Alaska loves
sex," the Colonel said. "This is a man
who once constructed a bong using only
the barrel of an air rifle, a ripe pear, and
an eight-by-ten glossy photograph of
Anna Kournikova. Not the brightest gem
in the jewelry shop, but you've got to
admire his single-minded dedication to
drug abuse."
From Hank, the Colonel told me, it
went downhill until you reached Wilson
Carbod, the starting center, who was
almost six feet tall. "We're so bad," the
Colonel said, "we don't even have a
mascot. I call us the Culver Creek
Nothings."
"So they just suck?" I asked. I didn't
quite understand the point of watching
your terrible team get walloped, though
the air-conditioning was reason enough
for me.
"Oh, they suck," the Colonel replied.
"But we always beat the shit out of the
deaf-and-blind school." Apparently,
basketball wasn't a big priority at the
Alabama School for the Deaf and Blind,
and so we usually came out of the season
with a single victory.
When we arrived, the gym was
packed with most every Culver Creek
student — I noticed, for instance, the
Creek's three goth girls reapplying their
eyeliner as they sat on the top row of the
gym's bleachers. I'd never attended a
school basketball game back home, but I
doubted the crowds there were quite so
inclusive. Even so, I was surprised
when none other than Kevin Richman sat
down on the bleacher directly in front of
me while the opposing school's
cheerleading team (their unfortunate
school colors were mud-brown and
dehydrated-piss-yellow) tried to fire up
the small visitors' section in the crowd.
Kevin turned around and stared at the
Colonel.
Like most of the other guy Warriors,
Kevin dressed preppy, looking like a
lawyer-who-enjoys-golfing waiting to
happen. And his hair, a blond mop, short
on the sides and spiky on top, was
always soaked through with so much gel
that it looked perennially wet. I didn't
hate him like the Colonel did, of course,
because the Colonel hated him on
principle, and principled hate is a hell of
a lot stronger than "Boy, I wish you
hadn't mummified me and thrown me into
the lake" hate. Still, I tried to stare at
him intimidatingly as he looked at the
Colonel, but it was hard to forget that
this guy had seen my skinny ass in
nothing but boxers a couple weeks ago.
"You ratted out Paul and Marya. We
got you back. Truce?" Kevin asked.
"I didn't rat them out. Pudge here
certainly didn't rat them out, but you
brought him in on your fun. Truce?
Hmm, let me take a poll real quick."
The cheerleaders sat down, holding their
pompoms close to their chest as if
praying. "Hey, Pudge," the Colonel said.
"What do you think of a truce?"
"It reminds me of when the Germans
demanded that the U.S. surrender at the
Battle of the Bulge," I said. "I guess I'd
say to this truce offer what General
McAuliffe said to that one: Nuts."
"Why would you try to kill this guy,
Kevin? He's a genius. Nuts to your
truce."
"Come on, dude. I know you ratted
them out, and we had to defend our
friend, and now it's over. Let's end it."
He seemed very sincere, perhaps due to
the Colonel's reputation for pranking.
"I'll make you a deal. You pick one
dead American president. If Pudge
doesn't know that guy's last words, truce.
If he does, you spend the rest of your
life lamenting the day you pissed in my
shoes."
"That's retarded."
"All right, no truce," the Colonel
shot back.
"Fine. Millard Fillmore," Kevin
said. The Colonel looked at me
hurriedly, his eyes saying, Was that guy
a president? I just smiled.
"When Fillmore was dying, he was
super hungry. But his doctor was trying
to starve his fever or whatever.
Fillmore wouldn't shut up about
wanting to eat, though, so finally the
doctor gave him a tiny teaspoon of soup.
And all sarcastic, Fillmore said,
'The nourishment is palatable,' and then
died. No truce."
Kevin rolled his eyes and walked
away, and it occurred to me that I could
have made up any last words for Millard
Fillmore and Kevin probably would
have believed me if I'd used that same
tone of voice, the Colonel's confidence
rubbing off on me.
"That was your first badass
moment!" The Colonel laughed.
"Now, it's true that I gave you an
easy target. But still. Well done."
Unfortunately for the Culver Creek
Nothings, we weren't playing the deafand-
blind school. We were playing
some Christian school from downtown
Birmingham, a team stocked with huge,
gargantuan apemen with thick beards and
a strong distaste for turning the
othercheek.
At the end of the first quarter: 20-4.
And that's when the fun started. The
Colonel led all of the cheers.
"Cornbread!" he screamed.
"CHICKEN!" the crowd responded.
"Rice!"
"PEAS!"
And then, all together: "WE GOT
HIGHER SATs."
"Hip Hip Hip Hooray!" the Colonel
cried.
"YOU'LL BE WORKIN' FOR US
SOMEDAY!"
The opposing team's cheerleaders
tried to answer our cheers with "The
roof, the roof, the roof is on fire! Hell is
in your future if you give in to desire,"
but we could always do them one better.
"Buy!"
"SELL!"
"Trade!"
"BARTER!"
"YOU'RE MUCH BIGGER, BUT
WE ARE SMARTER!"
When the visitors shoot a free throw
on most every court in the country, the
fans make a lot of noise, screaming and
stomping their feet. It doesn't work,
because players learn to tune out white
noise. At Culver Creek, we had a much
better strategy. At first, everyone yelled
and screamed like in a normal game. But
then everyone said, "Shh!" and there was
absolute silence. Just as our hated
opponent stopped dribbling and
prepared for his shot, the Colonel stood
up and screamed something. Like: "For
the love of God, please shave your back
hair!" Or: "I need to be saved. Can you
minister to me after your shot?!"
Toward the end of the third quarter,
the Christian-school coach called a
time-out and complained to the ref about
the Colonel, pointing at him angrily. We
were down 56–13. The Colonel stood
up. "What?! You have a problem with
me!?"
The coach screamed, "You're
bothering my players!"
"THAT'S THE POINT,
SHERLOCK!" the Colonel screamed
back. The ref came over and kicked him
out of the gym. I followed him.
"I've gotten thrown out of thirtyseven
straight games," he said.
"Damn."
"Yeah. Once or twice, I've had to go
really crazy. I ran onto the court with
eleven seconds left once and stole the
ball from the other team. It wasn't pretty.
But, you know. I have a streak to
maintain."
The Colonel ran ahead of me, gleeful
at his ejection, and I jogged after him,
trailing in his wake. I wanted to be one
of those people who have streaks to
maintain, who scorch the ground with
their intensity. But for now, at least I
knew such people, and they needed me,
just like comets need tails.
one hundred eight
days before
The next day, Dr. Hyde asked me to
stay after class. Standing before him, I
realized for the first time how hunched
his shoulders were, and he seemed
suddenly sad and kind of old. "You like
this class, don't you?" he asked.
"Yes sir."
"You've got a lifetime to mull over
the Buddhist understanding of
interconnectedness." He spoke every
sentence as if he'd written it down,
memorized it, and was now reciting it.
"But while you were looking out the
window, you missed the chance to
explore the equally interesting Buddhist
belief in being present for every facet of
your daily life, of being truly present. Be
present in this class. And then, when it's
over, be present out there," he said,
nodding toward the lake and beyond.
"Yes sir."
one hundred one
one hundred one
days before
On the first morning of October, I
knew something was wrong as soon as I
woke up enough to turn off the alarm
clock. The bed didn't smell right. And I
didn't feel right. It took me a groggy
minute before I realized: I felt cold.
Well, at the very least, the small fan
clipped to my bunk seemed suddenly
unnecessary. "It's cold!" I shouted.
"Oh God, what time is it?" I heard
above me.
"Eight-oh-four,"I said.
The Colonel, who didn't have an
alarm clock but almost always woke up
to take a shower before mine went off,
swung his short legs over the side of the
bed, jumped down, and dashed to his
dresser.
"I suppose I missed my window of
opportunity to shower," he said as he put
on a greenculver creek basketball Tshirt
and a pair of shorts. "Oh well.
There's always tomorrow. And it's not
cold. It's probably eighty."
Grateful to have slept fully dressed, I
just put on shoes, and the Colonel and I
jogged to the classrooms. I slid into my
seat with twenty seconds to spare.
Halfway through class, Madame
O'Malley turned around to write
something in French on the blackboard,
and Alaska passed me a note.
Nice bedhead. Study at McDonald's
for lunch?
Our first significant precalc test was
only two days away, so Alaska grabbed
the six precalc kids she did not consider
Weekday Warriors and piled us into her
tiny blue two-door. By happy
coincidence, a cute sophomore named
Lara ended up sitting on my lap. Lara'd
been born in Russia or someplace, and
she spoke with a slight accent. Since we
were only four layers of clothes from
doing it, I took the opportunity to
introduce myself.
"I know who you are." She smiled.
"You're Alaska's freend from Flow
Reeda."
"Yup. Get ready for a lot of dumb
questions, 'cause I suck at precalc," I
said. She started to answer, but then she
was thrown back against me as Alaska
shot out of the parking lot.
"Kids, meet Blue Citrus. So named
because she is a lemon," Alaska said.
"Blue Citrus, meet the kids. If you can
find them, you might want to fasten your
seat belts. Pudge, you might want to
serve as a seat belt for Lara." What the
car lacked in speed, Alaska made up for
by refusing to move her foot from the
accelerator, damn the consequences.
Before we even got off campus, Lara
was lurching helplessly whenever
Alaska took hard turns, so I took
Alaska's advice and wrapped my arms
around Lara's waist.
"Thanks," she said, almost inaudibly.
After a fast if reckless three miles to
McDonald's, we ordered seven large
french fries to share and then went
outside and sat on the lawn. We sat in a
circle around the trays of fries, and
Alaska taught class, smoking while she
ate.
Like any good teacher, she tolerated
little dissension. She smoked and talked
and ate for an hour without stopping, and
I scribbled in my notebook as the muddy
waters of tangents and cosines began to
clarify. But not everyone was so
fortunate.
As Alaska zipped through something
obvious about linear equations,
stoner/baller Hank Walsten said, "Wait,
wait. I don't get it."
"That's because you have eight
functioning brain cells."
"Studies show that marijuana is
better for your health than those
cigarettes," Hank said.
Alaska swallowed a mouthful of
french fries, took a drag on her cigarette,
and blew smoke across the table at
Hank. "I may die young," she said. "But
at least I'll die smart. Now, back to
tangents."
one hundred days
before
"Not to ask the obvious question, but
why Alaska?" I asked. I'd just gotten my
precalc test back, and I was awash with
admiration for Alaska, since her tutoring
had paved my way to a B-plus. She and I
sat alone in the TV lounge watching
MTV on a drearily cloudy Saturday.
Furnished with couches left behind by
previous generations of Culver Creek
students, the TV room had the musty air
of dust and mildew — and, perhaps for
that reason, was almost perennially
unoccupied. Alaska took a sip of
Mountain Dew and grabbed my hand in
hers. "Always comes up eventually. All
right, so my mom was something of a
hippie when I was a kid. You know,
wore oversize sweaters she knitted
herself, smoked a lot of pot, et cetera.
And my dad was a real Republican type,
and so when I was born, my mom
wanted to name me Harmony Springs
Young, and my dad wanted to name me
Mary Frances Young." As she talked,
she bobbed her head back and forth to
the MTV music, even though the song
was the kind of manufactured pop ballad
she professed to hate.
"So instead of naming me Harmony
or Mary, they agreed to let me decide.
So when I was little, they called me
Mary. I mean, they called me sweetie or
whatever, but like on school forms and
stuff, they wrote Mary Young.
And then on my seventh birthday, my
present was that I got to pick my name.
Cool, huh? So I spent the whole day
looking at my dad's globe for a really
cool name. And so my first choice was
Chad, like the country in Africa.
But then my dad said that was a
boy's name, so I picked Alaska."
I wish my parents had let me pick my
name. But they went ahead and picked
the only name firstborn male Halters
have had for a century. "But why
Alaska?" I asked her.
She smiled with the right side of her
mouth. "Well, later, I found out what it
means. It's from an Aleut word, Alyeska.
It means 'that which the sea breaks
against,' and I love that. But at the time, I
just saw Alaska up there.
And it was big, just like I wanted to
be. And it was damn far away from Vine
Station, Alabama, just like I wanted to
be."
I laughed. "And now you're all
grown up and fairly far away from
home," I said, smiling. "So
congratulations."
She stopped the head bobbing and let
go of my (unfortunately sweaty) hand.
"Getting out isn't that easy," she said
seriously, her eyes on mine like I knew
the way out and wouldn't tell her.
And then she seemed to switch
conversational horses in midstream.
"Like after college, know what I want to
do?
Teach disabled kids. I'm a good
teacher, right? Shit, if I can teach you
precalc, I can teach anybody. Like
maybe kids with autism."
She talked softly and thoughtfully,
like she was telling me a secret, and I
leaned in toward her, suddenly
overwhelmed with the feeling that we
must kiss, that we ought to kiss right now
on the dusty orange couch with its
cigarette burns and its decades of
collected dust. And I would have: I
would have kept leaning toward her until
it became necessary to tilt my face so as
to miss her ski-slope nose, and I would
have felt the shock of her so-soft lips. I
would have. But then she snapped out of
it.
"No," she said, and I couldn't tell at
first whether she was reading my kissobsessed
mind or responding to herself
out loud. She turned away from me, and
softly, maybe to herself, said, "Jesus, I'm
not going to be one of those people who
sits around talking about what they're
gonna do. I'm just going to do it.
Imagining the future is a kind of
nostalgia."
"Huh?" I asked.
"You spend your whole life stuck in
the labyrinth, thinking about how you'll
escape it one day, and how awesome it
will be, and imagining that future keeps
you going, but you never do it. You just
use the future to escape the present."
I guess that made sense. I had
imagined that life at the Creek would be
a bit more exciting than it was — in
reality, there'd been more homework
than adventure — but if I hadn't
imagined it, I would never have gotten to
the Creek at all.
She turned back to the TV, a
commercial for a car now, and made a
joke about Blue Citrus needing its own
car commercial. Mimicking the deepvoiced
passion of commercial voiceovers,
she said, "It's small, it's slow, and
it's shitty, but it runs. Sometimes. Blue
Citrus: See Your Local Used-Car
Dealer." But I wanted to talk more about
her and Vine Station and the future.
"Sometimes I don't get you," I said.
She didn't even glance at me. She
just smiled toward the television and
said, "You never get me. That's the
whole point."
ninety-nine days
before
I spent most of the next day lying in
bed, immersed in the miserably
uninteresting fictional world of Ethan
Frome, while the Colonel sat at his
desk, unraveling the secrets of
differential equations or something.
Although we tried to ration our smoke
breaks amid the shower's steam, we ran
out of cigarettes before dark,
necessitating a trip to Alaska's room.
She lay on the floor, holding a book over
her head.
"Let's go smoke," he said.
"You're out of cigarettes, aren't
you?" she asked without looking up.
"Well. Yes."
"Got five bucks?" she asked.
"Nope."
"Pudge?" she asked.
"Yeah, all right." I fished a five out
of my pocket, and Alaska handed me a
pack of twenty Marlboro Lights. I knew
I'd smoke maybe five of them, but so
long as I subsidized the Colonel's
smoking, he couldn't really attack me for
being another rich kid, a Weekday
Warrior who just didn't happen to live in
Birmingham.
We grabbed Takumi and walked
down to the lake, hiding behind a few
trees, laughing. The Colonel blew smoke
rings, and Takumi called them
"pretentious," while Alaska followed the
smoke rings with her fingers, stabbing at
them like a kid trying to pop bubbles.
And then we heard a branch break. It
might have been a deer, but the Colonel
busted out anyway. A voice directly
behind us said, "Don't run, Chipper," and
the Colonel stopped, turned around, and
returned to us sheepishly.
The Eagle walked toward us slowly,
his lips pursed in disgust. He wore a
white shirt and a black tie, like always.
He gave each of us in turn the Look
of Doom.
"Y'all smell like a North Carolina
tobacco field in a wildfire," he said.
We stood silent. I felt
disproportionately terrible, like I had
just been caught fleeing the scene of a
murder.
Would he call my parents?
"I'll see you in Jury tomorrow at
five," he announced, and then walked
away. Alaska crouched down, picked up
the cigarette she had thrown away, and
started smoking again. The Eagle
wheeled around, his sixth sense
detecting Insubordination To Authority
Figures. Alaska dropped the cigarette
and stepped on it. The Eagle shook his
head, and even though he must have been
crazy mad, I swear to God he smiled.
"He loves me," Alaska told me as
we walked back to the dorm circle. "He
loves all y'all, too. He just loves the
school more. That's the thing. He thinks
busting us is good for the school and
good for us. It's the eternal struggle,
Pudge. The Good versus the Naughty."
"You're awfully philosophical for a
girl that just got busted," I told her.
"Sometimes you lose a battle. But
mischief always wins the war."
ninety-eight days
before
One of the unique things about
Culver Creek was the Jury. Every
semester, the faculty elected twelve
students, three from each class, to serve
on the Jury. The Jury meted out
punishment for non expellable offenses,
for everything from staying out past
curfew to smoking. Usually, it was
smoking or being in a girl's room after
seven.
So you went to the Jury, you made
your case, and they punished you. The
Eagle served as the judge, and he had the
right to overturn the Jury's verdict (just
like in the real American court system),
but he almost never did.
I made my way to Classroom 4 right
after my last class — forty minutes
early, just to be safe. I sat in the hall
with my back against the wall and read
my American history textbook (kind of
remedial reading for me, to be honest)
until Alaska showed up and sat down
next to me. She was chewing on her
bottom lip, and I asked whether she was
nervous.
"Well, yeah. Listen, just sit tight and
don't talk," she told me.
"You don't need to be nervous. But
this is the seventh time I've been caught
smoking. I just don't want — whatever.
I don't want to upset my dad."
"Does your mom smoke or
something?" I asked.
"Not anymore," Alaska said. "It's
fine. You'll be fine."
I didn't start to worry until it got to
be 4:50 and the Colonel and Takumi
were still unaccounted for. The members
of the Jury filed in one by one, walking
past us without any eye contact, which
made me feel worse. I counted all
twelve by 4:56, plus the Eagle.
At 4:58, the Colonel and Takumi
rounded the corner toward the
classrooms.
I never saw anything like it. Takumi
wore a starched white shirt with a red
tie with a black paisley print; the
Colonel wore his wrinkled pink buttondown
and flamingo tie. They walked in
step, heads up and shoulders back, like
some kind of action-movie heroes.
I heard Alaska sigh. "The Colonel's
doing his Napoleon walk."
"It's all good," the Colonel told me.
"Just don't say anything."
We walked in— two of us wearing
ties, and two of us wearing ratty T-shirts
— and the Eagle banged an honest-to-
God gavel against the podium in front of
him. The Jury sat in a line behind a
rectangular table. At the front of the
room, by the blackboard, were four
chairs. We sat down, and the Colonel
explained exactly what happened.
"Alaska and I were smoking down
by the lake. We usually go off campus,
but we forgot. We're sorry. It won't
happen again."
I didn't know what was going on. But
I knew my job: sit tight and shut up. One
of the kids looked at Takumi and asked,
"What about you and Halter?"
"We were keeping them company,"
Takumi said calmly.
The kid turned to the Eagle then and
asked, "Did you see anyone smoking?"
"I only saw Alaska, but Chip ran
away, which struck me as cowardly, as
does Miles and Takumi's aw-shucks
routine," the Eagle said, giving me the
Look of Doom. I didn't want to look
guilty, but I couldn't hold his stare, so I
just looked down at my hands.
The Colonel gritted his teeth, like it
pained him to lie. "It is the truth, sir."
The Eagle asked if any of us wanted
to say anything, and then asked if there
were any more questions, and then sent
us outside.
"What the hell was that?" I asked
Takumi when we got outside.
"Just sit tight, Pudge."
Why have Alaska confess when
she'd already been in trouble so many
times? Why the Colonel, who literally
couldn't afford to get in serious trouble?
Why not me? I'd never been busted for
anything. I had the least to lose.
After a couple minutes, the Eagle
came out and motioned for us to come
back inside.
"Alaska and Chip," a member of the
Jury said, "you get ten work hours —
doing dishes in the cafeteria — and
you're both officially one problem away
from a phone call home. Takumi and
Miles, there's nothing in the rules about
watching someone smoke, but the Jury
will remember your story if you break
the rules again. Fair?"
"Fair," Alaska said quickly,
obviously relieved. On my way out, the
Eagle spun me around. "Don't abuse your
privileges at this school, young man, or
you will regret it." I nodded.
eighty-nine days
before
"We found you a girlfriend," Alaska
said to me. Still, no one had explained to
me what happened the week before with
the Jury. It didn't seem to have affected
Alaska, though, who was 1. in our room
after dark with the door closed, and 2.
smoking a cigarette as she sat on the
mostly foam couch. She had stuffed a
towel into the bottom of our door and
insisted it was safe, but I worried —
about the cigarette and the "girlfriend."
"All I have to do now," she said, "is
convince you to like her and convince
her to like you."
"Monumental tasks," the Colonel
pointed out. He lay on the top bunk,
reading for his English class. Moby-
Dick.
"How can you read and talk at the
same time?" I asked.
"Well, I usually can't, but neither the
book nor the conversation is particularly
intellectually challenging."
"I like that book," Alaska said.
"Yes." The Colonel smiled and
leaned over to look at her from his top
bunk. "You would. Big white whale is a
metaphor for everything. You live for
pretentious metaphors."
Alaska was unfazed. "So, Pudge,
what's your feeling on the former Soviet
bloc?"
"Urn. I'm in favor of it?"
She flicked the ashes of her cigarette
into my pencil holder. I almost
protested, but why bother. "You know
that girl in our precalc class," Alaska
said, "soft voice, says thees, no t this.
Know that girl?"
"Yeah. Lara. She sat on my lap on
the way to McDonald's."
"Right. I know. And she liked you.
You thought she was quietly discussing
precalc, when she was clearly talking
about having hot sex with you. Which is
why you need me."
"She has great breasts," the Colonel
said without looking up from the whale.
"DO NOT OBJECTIFY WOMEN'S
BODIES!" Alaska shouted.
Now he looked up. "Sorry. Perky
breasts."
"That's not any better!"
"Sure it is," he said. "Great is a
judgment on a woman's body. Perky is
merely an observation. They are perky. I
mean, Christ."
"You're hopeless," she said. "So she
thinks you're cute, Pudge."
"Nice."
"Doesn't mean anything. Problem
with you is that if you talk to her you'll
"uh um uh' your way to disaster."
"Don't be so hard on him," the
Colonel interrupted, as if he was my
mom. "God, I understand whale
anatomy.
Can we move on now, Herman?"
"So Jake is going to be in
Birmingham this weekend, and we're
going on a triple date. Well, triple and a
half, since Takumi will be there, too.
Very low pressure. You won't be able to
screw up, because I'll be there the whole
time."
"Okay."
"Who's my date?" the Colonel asked.
"Your girlfriend is your date."
"All right," he said, and then
deadpanned, "but we don't get along
very well."
"So Friday? Do you have plans for
Friday?" And then I laughed, because the
Colonel and I didn't have plans for this
Friday, or for any other Friday for the
rest of our lives.
"I didn't think so." She smiled.
"Now, we gotta go do dishes in the
cafeteria, Chipper. God, the sacrifices I
make."
eighty-seven days
before
Our triple-and-a-half date started off
well enough. I was in Alaska's room —
for the sake of getting me a girlfriend,
she'd agreed to iron a green button-down
shirt for me — when Jake showed up.
With blond hair to his shoulders, dark
stubble on his cheeks, and the kind of
faux-ruggedness that gets you a career as
a catalog model, Jake was every bit as
good-looking and you'd expect Alaska's
boyfriend to be. She jumped onto him
and wrapped her legs around him (God
forbid anyone ever does that to me, I
thought. Ill fall over). I'd heard Alaska
talk about kissing, but I'd never seen her
kiss until then: As he held her by her
waist, she leaned forward, her pouty lips
parted, her head just slightly tilted, and
enveloped his mouth with such passion
that I felt I should look away but
couldn't. A good while later, she
untangled herself from Jake and
introduced me.
"This is Pudge," she said. Jake and I
shook hands.
"I've heard a lot about ya." He spoke
with a slight Southern accent, one of the
few I'd heard outside of McDonald's. "I
hope your date works out tonight, 'cause
I wouldn't want you stealin' Alaska out
from under me."
"God, you're so adorable," Alaska
said before I could answer, kissing him
again. "I'm sorry." She laughed. "I just
can't seem to stop kissing my boyfriend."
I put on my freshly starched green
shirt, and the three of us gathered up the
Colonel, Sara, Lara, and Takumi and
then walked to the gym to watch the
Culver Creek Nothings take on Harsden
Academy, a private day school in
Mountain Brook, Birmingham's richest
suburb. The Colonel's hatred for
Harsden burned with the fire of a
thousand suns. "The only thing I hate
more than rich people," he told me as we
walked to the gym, "is stupid people.
And all the kids at Harsden are rich, and
they're all too stupid to get into the
Creek."
Since we were supposed to be on a
date and all, I thought I'd sit next to Lara
at the game, but as I tried to walk past a
seated Alaska on my way to Lara,
Alaska shot me a look and patted the
empty spot next to her on the bleachers.
"I'm not allowed to sit next to my
date?" I asked.
"Pudge, one of us has been a girl her
whole life. The other of us has never
gotten to second base. If I were you, I'd
sit down, look cute, and be your
pleasantly aloof self."
"Okay. Whatever you say."
Jake said, "That's pretty much my
strategy for pleasing Alaska."
"Aww," she said, "so sweet! Pudge,
did I tell you that Jake is recording an
album with his band? They're fantastic.
They're like Radiohead meets the
Flaming Lips. Did I tell you that I came
up with their name, Hickman Territory?"
And then, realizing she was being silly:
"Did I tell you that Jake is hung like a
horse and a beautiful, sensual lover?"
"Baby, Jesus." Jake smiled. "Not in
front of the kids."
I wanted to hate Jake, of course, but
as I watched them together, smiling and
fumbling all over each other, I didn't
hate him. I wanted to be him, sure, but I
tried to remember I was ostensibly on a
date with someone else.
Harsden Academy's star player was
a six-foot-seven Goliath named Travis
Eastman that everyone — even his
mother, I suspect — called the Beast.
The first time the Beast got to the freethrow
line, the Colonel could not keep
himself from swearing while he taunted:
"You owe everything to your daddy, you
stupid redneck bastard."
The Beast turned around and glared,
and the Colonel almost got kicked out
after the first free throw, but he smiled at
the ref and said, "Sorry!"
"I want to stay around for a good
part of this one," he said to me.
At the start of the second half, with
the Creek down by a surprisingly slim
margin of twenty-four points and the
Beast at the foul line, the Colonel looked
at Takumi and said, "It's time." Takumi
and the Colonel stood up as the crowd
went, "Shhh…"
"I don't know if this is the best time
to tell you this," the Colonel shouted at
the Beast, "but Takumi here hooked up
with your girlfriend just before the
game."
That made everyone laugh — except
the Beast, who turned from the free
throw line and walked calmly, with the
ball, toward us.
"I think we run now," Takumi said.
"I haven't gotten kicked out," the
Colonel answered.
"Later," Takumi said.
I don't know whether it was the
general anxiety of being on a date (albeit
one with my would-be date sitting five
people away from me) or the specific
anxiety of having the Beast stare in my
direction, but for some reason, I took off
running after Takumi. I thought we were
in the clear as we began to round the
corner of the bleachers, but then I saw,
out of the corner of my eye, a cylindrical
orange object getting bigger and bigger,
like a fast-approaching sun.
I thought: I think that is going to hit
me.
I thought: J should duck.
But in the time between when
something gets thought and when it gets
done, the ball hit me square across the
side of the face. I fell, the back of my
head slamming against the gym floor. I
then stood up immediately, as if unhurt,
and left the gym.
Pride had gotten me off the floor of
the gym, but as soon as I was outside, I
sat down.
"I am concussed," I announced,
entirely sure of my self-diagnosis.
"You're fine," Takumi said as he
jogged back toward me. "Let's get out of
here before we're killed."
"I'm sorry," I said. "But I can't get
up. I have suffered a mild concussion."
Lara ran out and sat down next to
me.
"Are you okay?"
"I am concussed," I said.
Takumi sat down with me and
looked me in the eye. "Do you know
what happened to you?"
"The Beast got me."
"Do you know where you are?"
"I'm on a triple-and-a-half date."
"You're fine," Takumi said. "Let's
go."
And then I leaned forward and threw
up onto Lara's pants. I can't say why I
didn't lean backward or to the side. I
leaned forward and aimed my mouth
toward her jeans — a nice, buttflattering
pair of jeans, the kind of pants
a girl wears when she wants to look nice
but not look like she is trying to look
nice — and I threw up all over them.
Mostly peanut butter, but also clearly
some corn.
"Oh!" she said, surprised and
slightly horrified.
"Oh God," I said. "I'm so sorry."
"I think you might have a
concussion," Takumi said, as if the idea
had never been suggested.
"I am suffering from the nausea and
dizziness typically associated with a
mild concussion," I recited. While
Takumi went to get the Eagle and Lara
changed pants, I lay on the concrete
sidewalk. The Eagle came back with the
school nurse, who diagnosed me with —
get this — a concussion, and then
Takumi drove me to the hospital with
Lara riding shotgun. Apparently I lay in
the back and slowly repeated the words
"The. Symptoms. Generally. Associated.
With. Concussion."
So I spent my date at the hospital
with Lara and Takumi. The doctor told
me to go home and sleep a lot, but to
make sure and have someone wake me
up every four hours or so.
I vaguely remember Lara standing in
the doorway, the room dark and the
outside dark and everything mild and
comfortable but sort of spinny, the world
pulsing as if from a heavy bass beat.
And I vaguely remember Lara smiling at
me from the doorway, the glittering
ambiguity of a girl's smile, which seems
to promise an answer to the question but
never gives it. The question, the one
we've all been asking since girls
stopped being gross, the question that is
too simple to be uncomplicated: Does
she like me or like me? And then I fell
deeply, endlessly asleep and slept until
three in the morning, when the Colonel
woke me up.
"She dumped me," he said.
"I am concussed," I responded.
"So I heard. Hence my waking you
up. Video game?"
"Okay. But keep it on mute. My head
hurts."
"Yeah. Heard you puked on Lara.
Very suave."
"Dumped?" I asked, getting up.
"Yeah. Sara told Jake that I had a
hard-on for Alaska. Those words. In that
order. And I was like, 'Well, I don't have
a hard-on for anything at this moment.
You can check if you'd like,' and Sara
thought I was being too glib, I suppose,
because then she said she knew for a fact
I'd hooked up with Alaska. Which,
incidentally, is ridiculous. I.
Don't. Cheat," he said, and finally the
game finished loading and I half listened
as I drove a stock car in circles around a
silent track in Talladega. The circles
nauseated me, but I kept at it.
"So Alaska went ballistic,
basically." He affected Alaska's voice
then, making it more shrill and
headache-inducing than it actually was.
"'No woman should ever lie about
another woman! You've violated the
sacred covenant between women! How
will stabbing one another in the back
help women to rise above patriarchal
oppression?!' And so on. And then Jake
came to Alaska's defense, saying that she
would never cheat because she loved
him, and then I was like, 'Don't worry
about Sara. She just likes bullying
people.' And then Sara asked me why I
never stood up for her, and somewhere
in there I called her a crazy bitch, which
didn't go over particularly well. And
then the waitress asked us to leave, and
so we were standing in the parking lot
and she said, 'I've had enough,' and I just
stared at her and she said, 'Our
relationship is over.'" He stopped
talking then. "'Our relationship is over?'"
I repeated. I felt very spacey and thought
it was just best to repeat the last phrase
of whatever the Colonel said so he could
keep talking.
"Yeah. So that's it. You know what's
lame, Pudge? I really care about her. I
mean, we were hopeless. Badly
matched. But still. I mean, I said I loved
her. I lost my virginity to her."
"You lost your virginity to her?"
"Yeah. Yeah. I never told you that?
She's the only girl I've slept with. I don't
know. Even though we fought, like,
ninety-four percent of the time, I'm really
sad."
"You're really sad?"
"Sadder than I thought I'd be,
anyway. I mean, I knew it was
inevitable. We haven't had a pleasant
moment this whole year. Ever since I got
here, I mean, we were just on each other
relentlessly. I should have been nicer to
her.
I don't know. It's sad."
"It is sad," I repeated.
"I mean, it's stupid to miss someone
you didn't even get along with. But, I
don't know, it was nice, you know,
having someone you could always fight
with."
"Fighting," I said, and then,
confused, barely able to drive, I added,
"is nice."
"Right. I don't know what I'll do
now. I mean, it was nice to have her. I'm
a mad guy, Pudge. What do I do with
that?"
"You can fight with me," I said. I put
my controller down and leaned back on
our foam couch and was asleep. As I
drifted off, I heard the Colonel say, "I
can't be mad at you, you harmless skinny
bastard."
eighty-four days
before
Three days later,the rain began. My
head still hurt, and the sizable knot
above my left temple looked, the
Colonel thought, like a miniaturized
topographical map of Macedonia, which
I had not previously known was a place,
let alone a country. And as the Colonel
and I walked over the parched, halfdead
grass that Monday, I said, "I
suppose we could use some rain," and
the Colonel looked up at the low clouds
coming in fast and threatening, and then
he said, "Well, use it or not, we're sure
as shit going to get some."
And we sure as shit did. Twenty
minutes into French class, Madame
O'Malley was conjugating the verb to
believe in the subjunctive. Que je croie.
Que tu croies. Qu'il ou qu'elle croie.
She said it over and over, like it wasn't a
verb so much as a Buddhist mantra. Que
je croie; que tu croies; qu'il ou qu'elle
croie. What a funny thing to say over and
over again: I would believe; you would
believe; he or she would believe.
Believe what? I thought, and right then,
the rain came.
It came all at once and in a furious
torrent, like God was mad and wanted to
flood us out. Day after day, night after
night, it rained. It rained so that I
couldn't see across the dorm circle, so
that the lake swelled up and lapped
against the Adirondack swing,
swallowing half of the fake beach. By
the third day, I abandoned my umbrella
entirely and walked around in a
perpetual state of wetness. Everything at
the cafeteria tasted like the minor acid of
rainwater and everything stank of
mildew and showers became ludicrously
inappropriate because the whole
goddamned world had better water
pressure than the showers.
And the rain made hermits of us all.
The Colonel spent every not-in-class
moment sitting on the couch, reading the
almanac and playing video games, and I
wasn't sure whether he wanted to talk or
whether he just wanted to sit on the
white foam and drink his ambrosia in
peace.
After the disaster that was our
"date," I felt it best not to speak to Lara
under any circumstances, lest I suffer a
concussion and/or an attack of puking,
even though she'd told me in precalc the
next day that it was "no beeg deal."
And I saw Alaska only in class and
could never talk to her, because she
came to every class late and left the
moment the bell rang, before I could
even cap my pen and close my notebook.
On the fifth evening of the rain, I walked
into the cafeteria fully prepared to go
back to my room and eat a reheated
bufriedo for dinner if Alaska and/or
Takumi weren't eating (I knew full well
the Colonel was in Room 43, dining on
milk 'n' vodka). But I stayed, because I
saw Alaska sitting alone, her back to a
rain-streaked window. I grabbed a
heaping plate of fried okra and sat down
next to her.
"God, it's like it'll never end," I said,
referring to the rain.
"Indeed," she said. Her wet hair
hung from her head and mostly covered
her face. I ate some. She ate some.
"How've you been?" I finally asked.
"I'm really not up for answering any
questions that start with how, when,
where, why, or what."
"What's wrong?" I asked.
"That's a what. I'm not doing what's
right now. All right, I should go." She
pursed her lips and exhaled slowly, like
the way the Colonel blew out smoke.
"What—"Then I stopped myself and
reworded. "Did I do something?" I
asked.
She gathered her tray and stood up
before answering. "Of course not,
sweetie."
Her "sweetie" felt condescending,
not romantic, like a boy enduring his
first biblical rainstorm couldn't possibly
understand her problems — whatever
they were. It took a sincere effort not to
roll my eyes at her, though she wouldn't
have even noticed as she walked out of
the cafeteria with her hair dripping over
her face.
seventy-six days
before
"I feel better,"the Colonel told me on
the ninth day of the rainstorm as he sat
down next to me in religion class. "I had
an epiphany. Do you remember that night
when she came to the room and was a
complete and total bitch?"
"Yeah. The opera. The flamingo tie."
"Right."
"What about it?" I asked.
The Colonel pulled out a spiral
notebook, the top half of which was
soaking wet, and slowly pulled the
pages apart until he found his place.
"That was the epiphany. She's a
complete and total bitch."
Hyde hobbled in, leaning heavily on
a black cane. As he made his way
toward his chair, he drily noted, "My
trick knee is warning me that we might
have some rain. So prepare yourselves."
He stood in front of his chair, leaned
back cautiously, grabbed it with both
hands, and collapsed into the chair with
a series of quick, shallow breaths —
like a woman in labor.
"Although it isn't due for more than
two months, you'll be receiving your
paper topic for this semester today.
Now, I'm quite sure that you've all
read the syllabus for this class with such
frequency and seriousness that by now
you've committed it to memory." He
smirked. "But a reminder: This paper is
fifty percent of your grade. I encourage
you to take it seriously. Now, about this
Jesus fellow."
Hyde talked about the Gospel of
Mark, which I hadn't read until the day
before, although I was a Christian. I
guess. I'd been to church, uh, like four
times. Which is more frequently than I'd
been to a mosque or a synagogue.
He told us that in the first century,
around the time of Jesus, some of the
Roman coins had a picture of the
Emperor Augustus on them, and that
beneath his picture were inscribed the
words Filius Dei. The Son of God.
"We are speaking," he said, "of a
time in which gods had sons. It was not
so unusual to be a son of God. The
miracle, at least in that time and in that
place, was that Jesus — a peasant, a
Jew, a nobody in an empire ruled
exclusively by somebodies — was the
son of that God, the all-powerful God of
Abraham and Moses. That God's son
was not an emperor. Not even a trained
rabbi. A peasant and a Jew. A nobody
like you. While the Buddha was special
because he abandoned his wealth and
noble birth to seek enlightenment, Jesus
was special because he lacked wealth
and noble birth, but inherited the
ultimate nobility: King of Kings. Class
over. You can pick up a copy of your
final exam on the way out. Stay dry." It
wasn't until I stood up to leave that I
noticed Alaska had skipped class —
how could she skip the only class worth
attending? I grabbed a copy of the final
for her.
The final exam: What is the most
important question human beings must
answer? Choose your question wisely,
and then examine how Islam,
Buddhism, and Christianity attempt to
answer it "I hope that poor bastard lives
the rest of the school year," the Colonel
said as we jogged home through the rain,
"because I'm sure starting to enjoy that
class. What's your most important
question?"
After thirty seconds of running, I was
already winded. "What happens…to
us…when we die?"
"Christ, Pudge, if you don't stop
running, you're going to find out." He
slowed to a walk. "My question is: Why
do good people get rotten lots in life?
Holy shit, is that Alaska?"
She was running at us at full speed,
and she was screaming, but I couldn't
hear her over the pounding rain until she
was so close to us that I could see her
spit flying.
"The fuckers flooded my room. They
ruined like a hundred of my books!
Goddamned pissant Weekday Warrior
shit. Colonel, they poked a hole in the
gutter and connected a plastic tube from
the gutter down through my back
window into my room! The whole place
is soaking wet. My copy of The General
in His Labyrinth is absolutely ruined."
"That's pretty good," the Colonel
said, like an artist admiring another's
work.
"Hey!" she shouted.
"Sorry. Don't worry, dude," he said.
"God will punish the wicked. And
before He does, we will."
sixty-seven days
before
So this I show no ah felt.You wake
up one morning and God has forgiven
you and you walk around squinting all
day because you've forgotten how
sunlight feels warm and rough against
your skin like a kiss on the cheek from
your dad, and the whole world is
brighter and cleaner than ever before,
like central Alabama has been put in the
washing machine for two weeks and
cleaned with extra-superstrength
detergent with color brightener, and now
the grass is greener and the bufriedos are
crunchier.
I stayed by the classrooms that
afternoon, lying on my stomach in the
newly dry grass and reading for
American history — the Civil War, or as
it was known around these parts, the
War Between the States. To me, it was
the war that spawned a thousand good
last words. Like General Albert Sidney
Johnston, who, when asked if he was
injured, answered, "Yes, and I fear
seriously." Or Robert E. Lee, who, many
years after the war, in a dying delirium,
announced, "Strike the tent!"
I was mulling over why the
Confederate generals had better last
words than the Union ones (Ulysses S.
Grant's last word, "Water," was pretty
lame) when I noticed a shadow blocking
me from the sun. It had been some time
since I'd seen a shadow, and it startled
me a bit. I looked up.
"I brought you a snack," Takumi
said, dropping an oatmeal cream pie
onto my book.
"Very nutritious." I smiled.
"You've got your oats. You've got
your meal. You've got your cream. It's a
fuckin' food pyramid."
"Hell yeah it is."
And then I didn't know what to say.
Takumi knew a lot about hiphop; I knew
a lot about last words and video games.
Finally, I said, "I can't believe those
guys flooded Alaska's room."
"Yeah," Takumi said, not looking at
me. "Well, they had their reasons. You
have to understand that with like
everybody, even the Weekday Warriors,
Alaska is famous for pranking. I mean,
last year, we put a Volkswagen Beetle in
the library. So if they have a reason to
try and one-up her, they'll try. And that's
pretty ingenious, to divert water from the
gutter to her room. I mean, I don't want
to admire it…"
I laughed. "Yeah. That will be tough
to top." I unwrapped the cream pie and
bit into it. Mmm…hundreds of delicious
calories per bite.
"She'll think of something," he said.
"Pudge," he said. "Hmm. Pudge, you
need a cigarette. Let's go for a walk."
I felt nervous, as I invariably do
when someone says my name twice with
a hmm in between. But I got up, leaving
my books behind, and walked toward the
Smoking Hole. But as soon as we got to
the edge of the woods, Takumi turned
away from the dirt road. "Not sure the
Hole is safe," he said. Not safe? I
thought. It's the safest place to smoke a
cigarette in the known universe. But I
just followed him through the thick
brush, weaving through pine trees and
threatening, chest-high brambly bushes.
After a while, he just sat down. I cupped
my hand around my lighter to protect the
flame from the slight breeze and lit up.
"Alaska ratted out Marya," he said.
"So the Eagle might know about the
Smoking Hole, too. I don't know. I've
never seen him down that way, but who
knows what she told him."
"Wait, how do you know?" I asked,
dubious.
"Well, for one thing, I figured it out.
And for another, Alaska admitted it. She
told me at least part of the truth, that
right at the end of school last year, she
tried to sneak off campus one night after
lights-out to go visit Jake and then got
busted. She said she was careful — no
headlights or anything — but the Eagle
caught her, and she had a bottle of wine
in her car, so she was fucked. And the
Eagle took her into his house and gave
her the same offer he gives to everyone
when they get fatally busted. 'Either tell
me everything you know or go to your
room and pack up your stuff.' So Alaska
broke and told him that Marya and Paul
were drunk and in her room right then.
And then she told him God knows
what else. And so the Eagle let her go,
because he needs rats to do his job. She
was smart, really, to rat on one of her
friends, because no one ever thinks to
blame the friends. That's why the
Colonel is so sure it was Kevin and his
boys. I didn't believe it could be Alaska,
either, until I figured out that she was the
only person on campus who could've
known what Marya was doing. I
suspected Paul's roommate, Longwell —
one of the guys who pulled the armlessmermaid
bit on you. Turns out he was at
home that night. His aunt had died. I
checked the obit in the paper. Hollis
Burnis Chase — hell of a name for a
woman."
"So the Colonel doesn't know?" I
asked, stunned. I put out my cigarette,
even though I wasn't quite finished,
because I felt spooked. I'd never
suspected Alaska could be disloyal.
Moody, yes. But not a rat.
"No, and he can't know, because
he'll go crazy and get her expelled. The
Colonel takes all this honor and loyalty
shit pretty seriously, if you haven't
noticed."
"I've noticed."
Takumi shook his head, his hands
pushing aside leaves to dig into the stillwet
dirt beneath. "I just don't get why
she'd be so afraid of getting expelled. I'd
hate to get expelled, but you have to take
your lumps. I don't get it."
"Well, she obviously doesn't like
home."
"True. She only goes home over
Christmas and the summer, when Jake is
there. But whatever. I don't like home,
either. But I'd never give the Eagle the
satisfaction." Takumi picked up a twig
and dug it into the soft red dirt.
"Listen, Pudge. I don't know what
kind of prank Alaska and the Colonel are
going to come up with to end this, but I'm
sure we'll both be involved. I'm telling
you all this so you can know what you're
getting into, because if you get caught,
you had better take it."
I thought of Florida, of my "school
friends," and realized for the first time
how much I would miss the Creek if I
ever had to leave it. I stared down at
Takumi's twig sticking erect out of the
mud and said, "I swear to God I won't
rat."
I finally understood that day at the
Jury: Alaska wanted to show us that we
could trust her. Survival at Culver Creek
meant loyalty, and she had ignored that.
But then she'd shown me the way. She
and the Colonel had taken the fall for me
to show me how it was done, so I would
know what to do when the time came.
fifty-eight days
before
About a week later I woke up at 6:30
—6:30 on a Saturday! — to the sweet
melody of Decapitation: automatic
gunfire blasted out above the menacing,
bass-heavy background music of the
video game. I rolled over and saw
Alaska pulling the controller up and to
the right, as if that would help her
escape certain death. I had the same bad
habit.
"Can you at least mute it?"
"Pudge,"she said, fauxcondescending,
"the sound is an integral
part of the artistic experience of this
video game.
Muting Decapitation would be like
reading only every other word of Jane
Eyre. The Colonel woke up about half
an hour ago. He seemed a little annoyed,
so I told him to go sleep in my room."
"Maybe I'll join him," I said
groggily.
Rather than answering my question,
she remarked, "So I heard Takumi told
you. Yeah, I ratted out Marya, and I'm
sorry, and I'll never do it again. In other
news, are you staying here for
Thanksgiving? Because I am."
I rolled back toward the wall and
pulled the comforter over my head. I
didn't know whether to trust Alaska, and
I'd certainly had enough of her
unpredictability — cold one day, sweet
the next; irresistibly flirty one moment,
resistibly obnoxious the next. I preferred
the Colonel: At least when he was
cranky, he had a reason.
In a testament to the power of
fatigue, I managed to fall asleep quickly,
convinced that the shrieking of dying
monsters and Alaska's delighted squeals
upon killing them were nothing more
than a pleasant sound track by which to
dream. I woke up half an hour later,
when she sat down on my bed, her butt
against my hip. Her underwear, her
jeans, the comforter, my corduroys, and
my boxers between us, I thought. Five
layers, and yet I felt it, the nervous
warmth of touching — a pale reflection
of the fireworks of one mouth on
another, but a reflection nonetheless.
And in the almost-ness of the moment, I
cared at least enough. I wasn't sure
whether I liked her, and I doubted
whether I could trust her, but I cared at
least enough to try to find out. Her on my
bed, wide green eyes staring down at
me. The enduring mystery of her sly,
almost smirking, smile. Five layers
between us.
She continued as if I hadn't been
asleep. "Jake has to study. So he doesn't
want me in Nashville. Says he can't pay
attention to musicology while staring at
me. I said I would wear a burka, but he
wasn't convinced, so I'm staying here."
"I'm sorry," I said.
"Oh, don't be. I'll have loads to do.
There's a prank to plan. But I was
thinking you should stay here, too. In
fact, I have composed a list."
"A list?"
She reached into her pocket and
pulled out a heavily folded piece of
notebook paper and began to read.
"Why Pudge Should Stay at the
Creek for Thanksgiving: A List,by
Alaska Young.
"One. Because he is a very
conscientious student, Pudge has been
deprived of many wonderful Culver
Creek experiences, including but not
limited to A. drinking wine with me in
the woods, and B. getting up early on a
Saturday to eat breakfast at Mclnedible
and then driving through the greater
Birmingham area smoking cigarettes and
talking about how pathetically boring the
greater Birmingham area is, and also C.
going out late at night and lying in the
dewy soccer field and reading a Kurt
Vonnegut book by moonlight.
"Two. Although she certainly does
not excel at endeavors such as teaching
the French language, Madame O'Malley
makes a mean stuffing, and she invites
all the students who stay on campus to
Thanksgiving dinner.
Which is usually just me and the
South Korean exchange student, but
whatever. Pudge would be welcome.
"Three. I don't really have a Three,
but One and Two were awfully good."
One and Two appealed to me,
certainly, but mostly I liked the idea of
just her and just me on campus. "I'll talk
to my parents. Once they wake up," I
said. She coaxed me onto the couch, and
we played Decapitation together until
she abruptly dropped the controller.
"I'm not flirting. I'm just tired," she
said, kicking off her flip-flops. She
pulled her feet onto the foam couch,
tucking them behind a cushion, and
scooted up to put her head in my lap. My
corduroys. My boxers. Two layers. I
could feel the warmth of her cheek on
my thigh.
There are times when it is
appropriate, even preferable, to get an
erection when someone's face is in close
proximity to your penis.
This was not one of those times.
So I stopped thinking about the
layers and the warmth, muted the TV,
and focused on Decapitation.
At 8:30, I turned off the game and
scooted out from underneath Alaska. She
turned onto her back, still asleep, the
lines of my corduroy pants imprinted on
her cheek.
I usually only called my parents on
Sunday afternoons, so when my mom
heard my voice, she instantly
overreacted. "What's wrong, Miles? Are
you okay?"
"I'm fine, Mom. I think — if it's okay
with you, I think I might stay here for
Thanksgiving. A lot of my friends are
staying" — lie—"and I have a lot of
work to do" — double lie. "I had no
idea how hard the classes would be,
Mom" truth.
"Oh, sweetie. We miss you so much.
And there's a big Thanksgiving turkey
waiting for you. And all the cranberry
sauce you can eat."
I hated cranberry sauce, but for some
reason my mom persisted in her lifelong
belief that it was my very favorite food,
even though every single Thanksgiving I
politely declined to include it on my
plate.
"I know, Mom. I miss you guys, too.
But I really want to do well here" —
truth—"and plus it's really nice to have,
like, friends" — truth.
I knew that playing the friend card
would sell her on the idea, and it did. So
I got her blessing to stay on campus after
promising to hang out with them for
every minute of Christmas break (as if I
had other plans).
I spent the morning at the computer,
flipping back and forth between my
religion and English papers. There were
only two weeks of classes before exams
— the coming one and the one after
Thanksgiving — and so far, the best
personal answer I had to "What happens
to people after they die?" was "Well,
something. Maybe."
The Colonel came in at noon, his
thick ubermath book cradled in his arms.
"I just saw Sara," he said.
"How'd that work out for ya?"
"Bad. She said she still loved me.
God, 'I love you' really is the gateway
drug of breaking up. Saying' I love you'
while walking across the dorm circle
inevitably leads to saying 'I love you'
while you're doing it. So I just bolted." I
laughed. He pulled out a notebook and
sat down at his desk.
"Yeah. Ha-ha. So Alaska said you're
staying here."
"Yeah. I feel a little guilty about
ditching my parents, though."
"Yeah, well. If you're staying here in
hopes of making out with Alaska, I sure
wish you wouldn't. If you unmoor her
from the rock that is Jake, God have
mercy on us all. That would be some
drama, indeed. And as a rule, I like to
avoid drama."
"It's not because I want to make out
with her."
"Hold on." He grabbed a pencil and
scrawled excitedly at the paper as if he'd
just made a mathematical breakthrough
and then looked back up at me. "I just
did some calculations, and I've been
able to determine that you're full of shit."
And he was right. How could I
abandon my parents, who were nice
enough to pay for my education at Culver
Creek, my parents who had always
loved me, just because I maybe liked
some girl with a boyfriend? How could I
leave them alone with a giant turkey and
mounds of inedible cranberry sauce? So
during third period, I called my mom at
work. I wanted her to say it was okay, I
guess, for me to stay at the Creek for
Thanksgiving, but I didn't quite expect
her to excitedly tell me that she and Dad
had bought plane tickets to England
immediately after I called and were
planning to spend Thanksgiving in a
castle on their second honeymoon.
"Oh, that — that's awesome," I said,
and then quickly got off the phone
because I did not want her to hear me
cry.
I guess Alaska heard me slam down
the phone from her room, because she
opened the door as I turned away, but
said nothing. I walked across the dorm
circle, and then straight through the
soccer field, bushwhacking through the
woods, until I ended up on the banks of
Culver Creek just down from the bridge.
I sat with my butt on a rock and my feet
in the dark dirt of the creek bed and
tossed pebbles into the clear, shallow
water, and they landed with an empty
plop, barely audible over the rumbling
of the creek as it danced its way south.
The light filtered through the leaves and
pine needles above as if through lace,
the ground spotted in shadow.
I thought of the one thing about home
that I missed, my dad's study with its
built-in, floor-to-ceiling shelves sagging
with thick biographies, and the black
leather chair that kept me just
uncomfortable enough to keep from
feeling sleepy as I read. It was stupid, to
feel as upset as I did. I ditched them, but
it felt the other way around.
Still, I felt unmistakably homesick.
I looked up toward the bridge and
saw Alaska sitting on one of the blue
chairs at the Smoking Hole, and though
I'd thought I wanted to be alone, I found
myself saying, "Hey." Then, when she
did not turn to me, I screamed, "Alaska!"
She walked over.
"I was looking for you," she said,
joining me on the rock.
"Hey."
"I'm really sorry, Pudge," she said,
and put her arms around me, resting her
head against my shoulder. It occurred to
me that she didn't even know what had
happened, but she still sounded sincere.
"What am I going to do?"
"You'll spend Thanksgiving with me,
silly. Here."
"So why don't you go home for
vacations?" I asked her.
"I'm just scared of ghosts, Pudge.
And home is full of them."
fifty-two days
before
After everyone left;after the
Colonel's mom showed up in a beat-up
hatchback and he threw his giant duffel
bag into the backseat; and after he said,
"I'm not much for saying good-bye. I'll
see you in a week. Don't do anything I
wouldn't do"; and after a green
limousine arrived for Lara, whose father
was the only doctor in some small town
in southern Alabama; and after I joined
Alaska on a harrowing, we-don't-needno-
stinking-brakes drive to the airport to
drop off Takumi; and after the campus
settled into an eerie quiet, with no doors
slamming and no music playing and no
one laughing and no one screaming; after
all that: We made our way down to the
soccer field, and she took me to edge of
the field where the woods start, the same
steps I'd walked on my way to being
thrown into the lake. Beneath the full
moon she cast a shadow, and you could
see the curve from her waist to her hips
in the shadow, and after a while she
stopped and said, "Dig."
And I said, "Dig?" and she said,
"Dig," and we went on like that for a bit,
and then I got on my knees and dug
through the soft black dirt at the edge of
the woods, and before I could get very
far, my fingers scratched glass, and I dug
around the glass until I pulled out a
bottle of pink wine — Strawberry Hill,
it was called, I suppose because if it had
not tasted like vinegar with a dash of
maple syrup, it might have tasted like
strawberries.
"I have a fake ID," she said, "but it
sucks. So every time I go to the liquor
store, I try to buy ten bottles of this, and
some vodka for the Colonel. And so
when it finally works, I'm covered for a
semester. And then I give the Colonel his
vodka, and he puts it wherever he puts it,
and I take mine and bury it."
"Because you're a pirate," I said.
"Aye, matey. Precisely. Although
wine consumption has risen a bit this
semester, so we'll need to take a trip
tomorrow. This is the last bottle." She
unscrewed the cap — no corks here —
sipped, and handed it to me. "Don't
worry about the Eagle tonight," she said.
"He's just happy most everyone's
gone. He's probably masturbating for the
first time in a month."
I worried about it for a moment as I
held the bottle by the neck, but I wanted
to trust her, and so I did. I took a minor
sip, and as soon as I swallowed, I felt
my body rejecting the stinging syrup of
it. It washed back up my esophagus, but I
swallowed hard, and there, yes, I did it.
I was drinking on campus.
So we lay in the tall grass between
the soccer field and the woods, passing
the bottle back and forth and tilting our
heads up to sip the wince-inducing wine.
As promised in the list, she brought a
Kurt Vonnegut book, Cat's Cradle, and
she read aloud to me, her soft voice
mingling with the the frogs' croaking and
the grasshoppers landing softly around
us. I did not hear her words so much as
the cadence of her voice. She'd
obviously read the book many times
before, and so she read flawlessly and
confidently, and I could hear her smile in
the reading of it, and the sound of that
smile made me think that maybe I would
like novels better if Alaska Young read
them to me. After a while, she put down
the book, and I felt warm but not drunk
with the bottle resting between us — my
chest touching the bottle and her chest
touching the bottle but us not touching
each other, and then she placed her hand
on my leg.
Her hand just above my knee, the
palm flat and soft against my jeans and
her index finger making slow, lazy
circles that crept toward the inside of my
thigh, and with one layer between us,
God I wanted her. And lying there, amid
the tall, still grass and beneath the stardrunk
sky, listening to the just-this-sideof-
inaudible sound of her rhythmic
breathing and the noisy silence of the
bullfrogs, the grasshoppers, the distant
cars rushing endlessly on 1-65, I thought
it might be a fine time to say the Three
Little Words. And I steeled myself to say
them as I stared up at that starriest night,
convinced myself that she felt it, too, that
her hand so alive and vivid against my
leg was more than playful, and fuck Lara
and fuck Jake because I do, Alaska
Young, I do love you and what else
matters but that and my lips parted to
speak and before I could even begin to
breathe out the words, she said, "It's not
life or death, the labyrinth."
"Urn, okay. So what is it?"
"Suffering," she said. "Doing wrong
and having wrong things happen to you.
That's the problem. Bolivar was talking
about the pain, not about the living or
dying. How do you get out of the
labyrinth of suffering?"
"What's wrong?" I asked. And I felt
the absence of her hand on me.
"Nothing's wrong. But there's always
suffering, Pudge. Homework or malaria
or having a boyfriend who lives far
away when there's a good-looking boy
lying next to you. Suffering is universal.
It's the one thing Buddhists, Christians,
and Muslims are all worried about."
I turned to her. "Oh, so maybe Dr.
Hyde's class isn't total bullshit." And
both of us lying on our sides, she smiled,
our noses almost touching, my unblinking
eyes on hers, her face blushing from the
wine, and I opened my mouth again but
this time not to speak, and she reached
up and put a finger to my lips and said,
"Shh. Shh. Don't ruin it."
fifty-one days
before
The next morning,I didn't hear the
knocking, if there was any.
I just heard, "UP! Do you know what
time it is?!"
I looked at the clock and groggily
muttered, "It's seven thirty-six."
"No, Pudge. It's party time! We've
only got seven days left before everyone
comes back. Oh God, I can't even tell
you how nice it is to have you here. Last
Thanksgiving, I spent the whole time
constructing one massive candle using
the wax from all my little candles. God,
it was boring. I counted the ceiling tiles.
Sixty-seven down, eighty-four across.
Talk about suffering! Absolute torture."
"I'm really tired. I—" I said, and then
she cut me off.
"Poor Pudge. Oh, poor poor Pudge.
Do you want me to climb into bed with
you and cuddle?"
"Well, if you're offering—" "NO!
UP! NOW!"
She took me behind a wing of
Weekday Warrior rooms—50 to 59—
and stopped in front of a window,
placed her palms flat against it, and
pushed up until the window was half
open, then crawled inside. I followed.
"What do you see, Pudge?"
I saw a dorm room — the same
cinder-block walls, the same
dimensions, even the same layout as my
own. Their couch was nicer, and they
had an actual coffee table instead
ofcoffee table. They had two posters on
the wall. One featured a huge stack of
hundred-dollar bills with the caption the
first million is the hardest. On the
opposite wall, a poster of a red Ferrari.
"Uh, I see a dorm room."
"You're not looking, Pudge. When I
go into your room, I see a couple of guys
who love video games. When I look at
my room, I see a girl who loves books."
She walked over to the couch and picked
up a plastic soda bottle. "Look at this,"
she said, and I saw that it was half filled
with a brackish, brown liquid. Dip spit.
"So they dip. And they obviously aren't
hygienic about it. So are they going to
care if we pee on their toothbrushes?
They won't care enough, that's for sure.
Look. Tell me what these guys love."
"They love money," I said, pointing
to the poster. She threw up her hands,
exasperated.
"They all love money, Pudge. Okay,
go into the bathroom. Tell me what you
see there."
The game was annoying me a little,
but I went into the bathroom as she sat
down on that inviting couch. Inside the
shower, I found a dozen bottles of
shampoo and conditioner. In the
medicine cabinet, I found a cylindrical
bottle of something called Rewind. I
opened it — the bluish gel smelled like
flowers and rubbing alcohol, like a
fancy hair salon. (Under the sink, I also
found a tub of Vaseline so big that it
could have only had one possible use,
which I didn't care to dwell on.) I came
back into the room and excitedly said,
"They love their hair."
"Precisely!" she shouted. "Look on
the top bunk." Perilously positioned on
the thin wooden headboard of the bed, a
bottle of STAWET gel. "Kevin doesn't
just wake up with that spiky bedhead
look, Pudge. He works for it. He loves
that hair. They leave their hair products
here, Pudge, because they have
duplicates at home. All those boys do.
And you know why?"
"Because they're compensating for
their tiny little penises?" I asked.
"Ha ha. No. That's why they're
macho assholes. They love their hair
because they aren't smart enough to love
something more interesting. So we hit
them where it hurts: the scalp."
"Ohh-kaay," I said, unsure of how,
exactly, to prank someone's scalp.
She stood up and walked to the
window and bent over to shimmy out.
"Don't look at my ass," she said, and so I
looked at her ass, spreading out wide
from her thin waist. She effortlessly
somersaulted out the half-opened
window. I took the feet first approach,
and once I got my feet on the ground, I
limboed my upper body out the window.
"Well," she said. "That looked
awkward. Let's go to the Smoking Hole."
She shuffled her feet to kick up dry
orange dirt on the road to the bridge,
seeming not to walk so much as crosscountry
ski. As we followed the almosttrail
down from the bridge to the Hole,
she turned around and looked back at
me, stopping. "I wonder how one would
go about acquiring industrial-strength
blue dye," she said, and then held a tree
branch back for me.
forty-nine days
forty-nine days
before
Two days later — Monday, the first
real day of vacation — I spent the
morning working on my religion final
and went to Alaska's room in the
afternoon. She was reading in bed.
"Auden," she announced. "What
were his last words?"
"Don't know. Never heard of him."
"Never heard of him? You poor,
illiterate boy. Here, read this line." I
walked over and looked down at her
index finger. "You shall love your
crooked neighbour/ With your crooked
heart," I read aloud. "Yeah. That's pretty
good," I said.
"Pretty good? Sure, and bufriedos
are pretty good. Sex is pretty fun. The
sun is pretty hot. Jesus, it says so much
about love and brokenness — it's
perfect."
"Mm-hmm." I nodded
unenthusiastically.
"You're hopeless. Wanna go porn
hunting?"
"Huh?"
"We can't love our neighbors till we
know how crooked their hearts are.
Don't you like porn?" she asked, smiling.
"Urn," I answered. The truth was that
I hadn't seen much porn, but the idea of
looking at porn with Alaska had a
certain appeal.
We started with the 50s wing of
dorms and made our way backward
around the hexagon — she pushed open
the back windows while I looked out
and made sure no one was walking by.
I'd never been in most people's
rooms. After three months, I knew most
people, but I regularly talked to very few
— just the Colonel and Alaska and
Takumi, really. But in a few hours, I got
to know my classmates quite well.
Wilson Carbod, the center for the
Culver Creek Nothings, had
hemorrhoids, or at least he kept
hemorrhoidal cream secreted away in
the bottom drawer of his desk. Chandra
Kilers, a cute girl who loved math a
little too much, and who Alaska
believed was the Colonel's future
girlfriend, collected Cabbage Patch
Kids. I don't mean that she collected
Cabbage Patch Kids when she was, like,
five. She collected them now — dozens
of them — black, white, Latino, and
Asian, boys and girls, babies dressed
like farmhands and budding
businessmen. A senior Weekday
Warrior named Holly Moser sketched
nude self-portraits in charcoal pencil,
portraying her rotund form in all its
girth.
I was stunned by how many people
had booze. Even the Weekday Warriors,
who got to go home every weekend, had
beer and liquor stashed everywhere
from toilet tanks to the bottoms of dirtyclothes
hampers.
"God, I could have ratted out
anyone," Alaska said softly as she
unearthed a forty-ounce bottle of
Magnum malt liquor from Longwell
Chase's closet. I wondered, then, why
she had chosen Paul and Marya.
Alaska found everyone's secrets so
fast that I suspected she'd done this
before, but she couldn't possibly have
had advance knowledge of the secrets of
Ruth and Margot Blowker, ninth-grade
twin sisters who were new and seemed
to socialize even less than I did. After
crawling into their room, Alaska looked
around for a moment, then walked to the
bookshelf. She stared at it, then pulled
out the King James Bible, and there — a
purple bottle of Maui Wowie wine
cooler.
"How clever," she said as she
twisted off the cap. She drank it down in
two long sips, and then proclaimed,
"Maui WOWIE!"
"They'll know you were here!" I
shouted.
Her eyes widened. "Oh no, you're
right, Pudge!" she said.
"Maybe they'll go to the Eagle and
tell him that someone stole their wine
cooler!" She laughed and leaned out the
window, throwing the empty bottle into
the grass.
And we found plenty of porn
magazines haphazardly stuffed in
between mattresses and box springs. It
turns out that Hank Walsten did like
something other than basketball and pot:
he liked Juggs. But we didn't find a
movie until Room 32, occupied by a
couple of guys from Mississippi named
Joe and Marcus. They were in our
religion class and sometimes sat with the
Colonel and me at lunch, but I didn't
know them well.
Alaska read the sticker on the top of
the video. "The Bitches of Madison
County. Well. Ain't that just delightful."
We ran with it to the TV room,
closed the blinds, locked the door, and
watched the movie. It opened with a
woman standing on a bridge with her
legs spread while a guy knelt in front of
her, giving her oral sex. No time for
dialogue, I suppose. By the time they
started doing it, Alaska commenced with
her righteous indignation. "They just
don't make sex look fun for women. The
girl is just an object. Look! Look at
that!"
I was already looking, needless to
say. A woman crouched on her hands
and knees while a guy knelt behind her.
She kept saying "Give it to me" and
moaning, and though her eyes, brown
and blank, betrayed her lack of interest, I
couldn't help but take mental notes.
Hands on her shoulders, I noted. Fast,
but not too fast or it's going to be over,
fast. Keep your grunting to a minimum.
As if reading my mind, she said,
"God, Pudge. Never do it that hard. That
would hurt. That looks like torture.
And all she can do is just sit there
and take it? This is not a man and a
woman. It's a penis and a vagina. What's
erotic about that? Where's the kissing?"
"Given their position, I don't think
they can kiss right now," I noted.
"That's my point. Just by virtue of
how they're doing it, it's objectification.
He can't even see her face! This is what
can happen to women, Pudge. That
woman is someone's daughter. This is
what you make us do for money."
"Well, not me," I said defensively. "I
mean, not technically. I don't, like,
produce porn movies."
"Look me in the eye and tell me this
doesn't turn you on, Pudge."
I couldn't. She laughed. It was fine,
she said. Healthy. And then she got up,
stopped the tape, lay down on her
stomach across the couch, and mumbled
something.
"What did you say?" I asked,
walking to her, putting my hand on the
small of her back.
"Shhhh," she said. "I'm sleeping."
Just like that. From a hundred miles
an hour to asleep in a nanosecond. I
wanted so badly to lie down next to her
on the couch, to wrap my arms around
her and sleep. Not fuck, like in those
movies. Not even have sex. Just sleep
together, in the most innocent sense of
the phrase. But I lacked the courage and
she had a boyfriend and I was gawky
and she was gorgeous and I was
hopelessly boring and she was endlessly
fascinating. So I walked back to my
room and collapsed on the bottom bunk,
thinking that if people were rain, I was
drizzle and she was a hurricane.
forty-seven days
before
On Wednesday morning,I woke up
with a stuffy nose to an entirely new
Alabama, a crisp and cold one. As I
walked to Alaska's room that morning,
the frosty grass of the dorm circle
crunched beneath my shoes. You don't
run into frost much in Florida — and I
jumped up and down like I was stomping
on bubble wrap. Crunch. Crunch.
Crunch.
Alaska was holding a burning green
candle in her hand upside down,
dripping the wax onto a larger,
homemade volcano that looked a bit like
a Technicolor middle-school-scienceproject
volcano.
"Don't burn yourself," I said as the
flame crept up toward her hand.
"Night falls fast. Today is in the
past," she said without looking up.
"Wait, I've read that before. What is
that?" I asked.
With her free hand, she grabbed a
book and tossed it toward me. It landed
at my feet. "Poem," she said. "Edna St.
Vincent Millay. You've read that?
I'm stunned."
"Oh, I read her biography! Didn't
have her last words in it, though. I was a
little bitter. All I remember is that she
had a lot of sex."
"I know. She's my hero," Alaska said
without a trace of irony. I laughed, but
she didn't notice. "Does it seem at all
odd to you that you enjoy biographies of
great writers a lot more than you enjoy
their actual writing?"
"Nope!" I announced. "Just because
they were interesting people doesn't
mean I care to hear their musings on
nighttime."
"It's about depression, dumb-ass."
"Oooooh, really? Well, jeez, then it's
brilliant," I answered.
She sighed. "All right. The snow
may be falling in the winter of my
discontent, but at least I've got sarcastic
company. Sit down, will ya?"
I sat down next to her with my legs
crossed and our knees touching. She
pulled a clear plastic crate filled with
dozens of candles out from underneath
her bed. She looked at it for a moment,
then handed me a white one and a
lighter.
We spent all morning burning
candles — well, and occasionally
lighting cigarettes off the burning
candles after we stuffed a towel into the
crack at the bottom of her door. Over the
course of two hours, we added a full
foot to the summit of her polychrome
candle volcano.
"Mount St. Helens on acid," she said
At 12:30, after two hours of me begging
for a ride to McDonald's, Alaska
decided it was time for lunch. As we
began to walk to the student parking lot,
I saw a strange car. A small green car. A
hatchback. I've seen that car, I thought.
Where have I seen the car? And then the
Colonel jumped out and ran to meet us.
Rather than, like, I don't know,
"hello" or something, the Colonel began,
"I have been instructed to invite you to
Thanksgiving dinner at Chez Martin."
Alaska whispered into my ear, and
then I laughed and said, "I have been
instructed to accept your invitation." So
we walked over to the Eagle's house,
told him we were going to eat turkey
trailer-park style, and sped away in the
hatchback.
The Colonel explained it to us on the
two-hour car ride south. I was crammed
into the backseat because Alaska had
called shotgun. She usually drove, but
when she didn't, she was shotgun-calling
queen of the world. The Colonel's
mother heard that we were on campus
and couldn't bear the thought of leaving
us family less for Thanksgiving. The
Colonel didn't seem too keen on the
whole idea—"I'm going to have to sleep
in a tent," he said, and I laughed.
Except it turns out he did have to
sleep in a tent, a nice four-person green
outfit shaped like half an egg, but still a
tent. The Colonel's mom lived in a
trailer, as in the kind of thing you might
see attached to a large pickup truck,
except this particular one was old and
falling apart on its cinder blocks, and
probably couldn't have been hooked up
to a truck without disintegrating. It
wasn't even a particularly big trailer. I
could just barely stand up to my full
height without scraping the ceiling. Now
I understood why the Colonel was short
— he couldn't afford to be any taller.
The place was really one long room,
with a full-size bed in the front, a
kitchenette, and a living area in the back
with a TV and a small bathroom — so
small that in order to take a shower, you
pretty much had to sit on the toilet.
"It ain't much," the Colonel's mom
("That's Dolores, not Miss Martin") told
us. "But y'alls a-gonna have a turkey the
size o' the kitchen." She laughed. The
Colonel ushered us out of the trailer
immediately after our brief tour, and we
walked through the neighborhood, a
series of trailers and mobile homes on
dirt roads.
"Well, now you get why I hate rich
people." And I did. I couldn't fathom
how the Colonel grew up in such a small
place. The entire trailer was smaller
than our dorm room. I didn't know what
to say to him, how to make him feel less
embarrassed.
"I'm sorry if it makes you
uncomfortable," he said. "I know it's
probably foreign."
"Not to me," Alaska piped up.
"Well, you don't live in a trailer," he
told her.
"Poor is poor."
"I suppose," the Colonel said.
Alaska decided to go help Dolores
with dinner. She said that it was sexist to
leave the cooking to the women, but
better to have good sexist food than
crappy boy-prepared food. So the
Colonel and I sat on the pull-out couch
in the living room, playing video games
and talking about school.
"I finished my religion paper. But I
have to type it up on your computer
when we get back. I think I'm ready for
finals, which is good, since we have an
ank-pray to an-play."
"Your mom doesn't know pig Latin?"
I smirked.
"Not if I talk fast. Christ, be quiet."
The food — fried okra, steamed corn
on the cob, and pot roast that was so
tender it fell right off the plastic fork —
convinced me that Dolores was an even
better cook than Maureen. Culver
Creek's okra had less grease, more
crunch. Dolores was also the funniest
mom I'd ever met. When Alaska asked
her what she did for work, she smiled
and said, "I'm a culnary engineeyer.
That's a short-order cook at the Waffle
House to y'all."
"Best Waffle House in Alabama."
The Colonel smiled, and then I realized,
he wasn't embarrassed of his mom at all.
He was just scared that we would act
like condescending boarding-school
snobs. I'd always found the Colonel's Ihate-
the-rich routine a little overwrought
until I saw him with his mom. He was
the same Colonel, but in a totally
different context. It made me hope that
one day, I could meet Alaska's family,
too.
Dolores insisted that Alaska and I
share the bed, and she slept on the pullout
while the Colonel was out in his tent.
I worried he would get cold, but frankly
I wasn't about to give up my bed with
Alaska. We had separate blankets, and
there were never fewer than three layers
between us, but the possibilities kept me
up half the night.
forty-six days
before
Best thanksgiving food I'd ever had.
No crappy cranberry sauce. Just huge
slabs of moist white meat, corn, green
beans cooked in enough bacon fat to
make them taste like they weren't good
for you, biscuits with gravy, pumpkin pie
for dessert, and a glass of red wine for
each of us. "I believe," Dolores said,
"that yer s'posed to drink white with
turkey, but — now I don't know 'bout
y'all — but I don't s'pose I give a shit."
We laughed and drank our wine, and
then after the meal, we each listed our
gratitudes. My family always did that
before the meal, and we all just rushed
through it to get to the food. So the four
of us sat around the table and shared our
blessings. I was thankful for the fine
food and the fine company, for having a
home on Thanksgiving.
"A trailer, at least," Dolores joked.
"Okay, my turn," Alaska said. "I'm
grateful for having just had my best
Thanksgiving in a decade."
Then the Colonel said, "I'm just
grateful for you, Mom," and Dolores
laughed and said, "That dog won't hunt,
boy."
I didn't exactly know what that
phrase meant, but apparently it meant,
"That was inadequate," because then the
Colonel expanded his list to
acknowledge that he was grateful to be
"the smartest human being in this trailer
park," and Dolores laughed and said,
"Good enough."
And Dolores? She was grateful that
her phone was back on, that her boy was
home, that Alaska helped her cook and
that I had kept the Colonel out of her
hair, that her job was steady and her
coworkers were nice, that she had a
place to sleep and a boy who loved her.
I sat in the back of the hatchback on
the drive home — and that is how I
thought of it: home — and fell asleep to
the highway's monotonous lullaby.
forty-four days
before
"Coosa liquors'entire business
model is built around selling cigarettes
to minors and alcohol to adults." Alaska
looked at me with disconcerting
frequency when she drove, particularly
since we were winding through a
narrow, hilly highway south of school,
headed to the aforementioned Coosa
Liquors. It was Saturday, our last day of
real vacation. "Which is great, if all you
need is cigarettes. But we need booze.
And they card for booze. And my ID
blows. But I'll flirt my way through."
She made a sudden and unsignaled left
turn, pulling onto a road that dropped
precipitously down a hill with fields on
either side, and she gripped the steering
wheel tight as we accelerated, and she
waited until the last possible moment to
brake, just before we reached the bottom
of the hill.
There stood a plywood gas station
that no longer sold gas with a faded sign
bolted to the roof: coosa liquors: we
cater to your spiritual needs.
Alaska went in alone and walked out
the door five minutes later weighed
down by two paper bags filled with
contraband: three cartons of cigarettes,
five bottles of wine, and a fifth of vodka
for the Colonel. On the way home,
Alaska said, "You like knock-knock
jokes?"
"Knock-knock jokes?" I asked. "You
mean like, 'Knock knock…"
"Who's there?" replied Alaska.
"Who."
"Who Who?"
"What are you, an owl?" I finished.
Lame.
"That was brilliant," said Alaska. "I
have one. You start."
"Okay. Knock knock."
"Who's there?" said Alaska.
I looked at her blankly. About a
minute later, I got it, and laughed.
"My mom told me that joke when I
was six. It's still funny."
So I could not have been more
surprised when she showed up sobbing
at Room 43 just as I was putting the
finishing touches on my final paper for
English. She sat down on the couch, her
every exhalation a mix of whimper and
scream.
"I'm sorry," she said, heaving. Snot
was dribbling down her chin.
"What's wrong?" I asked. She picked
up a Kleenex from the coffee table and
wiped at her face.
"I don't…" she started, and then a
sob came like a tsunami, her cry so loud
and childlike that it scared me, and I got
up, sat down next her, and put my arm
around her. She turned away, pushing
her head into the foam of the couch. "I
don't understand why I screw everything
up," she said.
"What, like with Marya? Maybe you
were just scared."
"Scared isn't a good excuse!" she
shouted into the couch. "Scared is the
excuse everyone has always used!" I
didn't know who "everyone" was, or
when "always" was, and as much as I
wanted to understand her ambiguities,
the slyness was growing annoying.
"Why are you upset about this now?"
"It's not just that. It's everything. But
I told the Colonel in the car." She
sniffled but seemed done with the sobs.
"While you were sleeping in the
back. And he said he'd never let me out
of his sight during pranks. That he
couldn't trust me on my own. And I don't
blame him. I don't even trust me."
"It took guts to tell him," I said.
"I have guts, just not when it counts.
Will you — um," and she sat up straight
and then moved toward me, and I raised
my arm as she collapsed into my skinny
chest and cried. I felt bad for her, but
she'd done it to herself. She didn't have
to rat.
"I don't want to upset you, but maybe
you just need to tell us all why you told
on Marya. Were you scared of going
home or something?"
She pulled away from me and gave
me a Look of Doom that would have
made the Eagle proud, and I felt like she
hated me or hated my question or both,
and then she looked away, out the
window, toward the soccer field, and
said, "There's no home."
"Well, you have a family," I
backpedaled. She'd talked to me about
her mom just that morning. How could
the girl who told that joke three hours
before become a sobbing mess?
Still staring at me, she said, "I try not
to be scared, you know. But I still ruin
everything. I still fuck up."
"Okay," I told her. "It's okay." I
didn't even know what she was talking
about anymore. One vague notion after
another.
"Don't you know who you love,
Pudge? You love the girl who makes you
laugh and shows you porn and drinks
wine with you. You don't love the crazy,
sullen bitch."
And there was something to that,
truth be told.
Christmas We all went home for
Christmas break — even purportedly
homeless Alaska.
I got a nice watch and a new wallet
—"grown-up gifts," my dad called them.
But mostly I just studied for those two
weeks. Christmas vacation wasn't really
a vacation, on account of how it was our
last chance to study for exams, which
started the day after we got back. I
focused on precalc and biology, the two
classes that most deeply threatened my
goal of a 3.4 GPA. I wish I could say I
was in it for the thrill of learning, but
mostly I was in it for the thrill of getting
into a worthwhile college.
So, yeah, I spent a lot of my time at
home studying math and memorizing
French vocab, just like I had before
Culver Creek. Really, being at home for
two weeks was just like my entire life
before Culver Creek, except my parents
were more emotional. They talked very
little about their trip to London. I think
they felt guilty. That's a funny thing about
parents. Even though I pretty much
stayed at the Creek over Thanksgiving
because I wanted to, my parents still felt
guilty. It's nice to have people who will
feel guilty for you, although I could have
lived without my mom crying during
every single family dinner. She would
say, "I'm a bad mother," and my dad and
I would immediately reply, "No, you're
not."
Even my dad, who is affectionate but
not, like, sentimental, randomly, while
we were watching The Simpsons, said
he missed me. I said I missed him, too,
and I did. Sort of. They're such nice
people. We went to movies and played
card games, and I told them the stories I
could tell without horrifying them, and
they listened. My dad, who sold real
estate for a living but read more books
than anyone I knew, talked with me
about the books I was reading for
English class, and my mom insisted that I
sit with her in the kitchen and learn how
to make simple dishes — macaroni,
scrambled eggs — now that I was
"living on my own." Never mind that I
didn't have, or want, a kitchen. Never
mind that I didn't like eggs or macaroni
and cheese. By New Year's Day, I could
make them anyway.
When I left, they both cried, my mom
explaining that it was just empty-nest
syndrome, that they were just so proud
of me, that they loved me so much. That
put a lump in my throat, and I didn't care
about Thanksgiving anymore. I had a
family.
eight days before
Alaska walked in on the first day
back from Christmas break and sat
beside the Colonel on the couch. The
Colonel was hard at work, breaking a
land-speed record on the PlayStation.
She didn't say she missed us, or that
she was glad to see us. She just looked
at the couch and said, "You really need a
new couch."
"Please don't address me when I'm
racing," the Colonel said.
"God. Does Jeff Gordon have to put
up with this shit?"
"I've got an idea," she said. "It's
great. What we need is a pre-prank that
coincides with an attack on Kevin and
his minions," she said.
I was sitting on the bed, reading the
textbook in preparation for my American
history exam the next day.
"A pre-prank?" I asked.
"A prank designed to lull the
administration into a false sense of
security," the Colonel answered,
annoyed by the distraction. "After the
pre-prank, the Eagle will think the junior
class has done its prank and won't be
waiting for it when it actually comes."
Every year, the junior and senior classes
pulled off a prank at some point in the
year — usually something lame, like
Roman candles in the dorm circle at five
in the morning on a Sunday.
"Is there always a pre-prank?" I
asked.
"No, you idiot," the Colonel said. "If
there was always a pre-prank, then the
Eagle would expect two pranks. The last
time a pre-prank was used — hmm. Oh,
right: 1987. When the pre-prank was
cutting off electricity to campus, and then
the actual prank was putting five hundred
live crickets in the heating ducts of the
classrooms.
Sometimes you can still hear the
chirping."
"Your rote memorization is, like, so
impressive," I said.
"You guys are like an old married
couple." Alaska smiled. "In a creepy
way."
"You don't know the half of it," the
Colonel said. "You should see this kid
try to crawl into bed with me at night."
"Hey!"
"Let's get on subject!" Alaska said.
"Pre-prank. This weekend, since there's
a new moon. We're staying at the barn.
You, me, the Colonel, Takumi, and, as a
special gift to you, Pudge, Lara
Buterskaya."
"The Lara Buterskaya I puked on?"
"She's just shy. She still likes you."
Alaska laughed. "Puking made you look
— vulnerable."
"Very perky boobs," the Colonel
said. "Are you bringing Takumi for me?"
"You need to be single for a while."
"True enough," the Colonel said.
"Just spend a few more months
playing video games," she said. "That
hand-eye coordination will come in
handy when you get to third base."
"Gosh, I haven't heard the base
system in so long, I think I've forgotten
third base," the Colonel responded. "I
would roll my eyes at you, but I can't
afford to look away from the screen."
"French, Feel, Finger, Fuck. It's like
you skipped third grade," Alaska said.
"I did skip third grade," the Colonel
answered.
"So," I said, "what's our pre-prank?"
"The Colonel and I will work that
out. No need to get you into trouble —
yet."
"Oh. Okay. Um, I'm gonna go for a
cigarette, then."
I left. It wasn't the first time Alaska
had left me out of the loop, certainly, but
after we'd been together so much over
Thanksgiving, it seemed ridiculous to
plan the prank with the Colonel but
without me. Whose T-shirts were wet
with her tears? Mine. Who'd listened to
her read Vonnegut? Me. Who'd been the
butt of the world's worst knock-knock
joke? Me. I walked to the Sunny
Konvenience Kiosk across from school
and smoked. This never happened to me
in Florida, this oh-so-high-school angst
about who likes whom more, and I hated
myself for letting it happen now. You
don't have to care about her, I told
myself. Screw her.
four days before
The colonel wouldn't tell me a word
about the pre-prank, except that it was to
be called Barn Night, and that when I
packed, I should pack for two days.
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday
were torture. The Colonel was always
with Alaska, and I was never invited. So
I spent an inordinate amount of time
studying for finals, which helped my
GPA considerably. And I finally
finished my religion paper.
My answer to the question was
straightforward enough, really. Most
Christians and Muslims believe in a
heaven and a hell, though there's a lot of
disagreement within both religions over
what, exactly, will get you into one
afterlife or the other. Buddhists are more
complicated — because of the Buddha's
doctrine of anatta, which basically says
that people don't have eternal souls.
Instead, they have a bundle of energy,
and that bundle of energy is transitory,
migrating from one body to another,
reincarnating endlessly until it
eventually reaches enlightenment.
I never liked writing concluding
paragraphs to papers — where you just
repeat what you've already said with
phrases like In summation, a n d To
conclude. I didn't do that — instead I
talked about why I thought it was an
important question. People, I thought,
wanted security. They couldn't bear the
idea of death being a big black nothing,
couldn't bear the thought of their loved
ones not existing, and couldn't even
imagine themselves not existing. I
finally decided that people believed in
an afterlife because they couldn't bear
not to.
three days before
On Friday,after a surprisingly
successful precalc exam that brought my
first set of Culver Creek finals to a
close, I packed clothes ("Think New
York trendy," the Colonel advised.
"Think black. Think sensible.
Comfortable, but warm.") and my
sleeping bag into a backpack, and we
picked up Takumi in his room and
walked to the Eagle's house. The Eagle
was wearing his only outfit, and I
wondered whether he just had thirty
identical white button-down shirts and
thirty identical black ties in his closet. I
pictured him waking up in the morning,
staring at his closet, and thinking,
Hmm…hmm…how about a white shirt
and a black tie? Talk about a guy who
could use a wife.
"I'm taking Miles and Takumi home
for the weekend to New Hope," the
Colonel told him.
"Miles liked his taste of New Hope
that much?" the Eagle asked me.
"Yee haw! There's a gonna be a
hoedown at the trailer park!" the Colonel
said. He could actually have a Southern
accent when he wanted to, although like
most everyone at Culver Creek, he didn't
usually speak with one.
"Hold on one moment while I call
your mom," the Eagle said to the
Colonel.
Takumi looked at me with poorly
disguised panic, and I felt lunch — fried
chicken — rising in my stomach. But the
Colonel just smiled. "Sure thing."
"Chip and Miles and Takumi will be
at your house this weekend?…Yes,
ma'am…. Ha!…Okay. Bye now." The
Eagle looked upat the Colonel. "Your
mom is a wonderful woman." The Eagle
smiled.
"You're tellin' me." The Colonel
grinned. "See you on Sunday."
As we walked toward the gym
parking lot, the Colonel said, "I called
her yesterday and asked her to cover for
me, and she didn't even ask why. She
just said, 'I sure trust you, son,' and hot
damn she does." Once out of sight of the
Eagle's house, we took a sharp right into
the woods.
We walked on the dirt road over the
bridge and back to the school's barn, a
dilapidated leak-prone structure that
looked more like a long-abandoned log
cabin than a barn. They still stored hay
there, although I don't know what for. It
wasn't like we had an equestrian
program or anything. The Colonel,
Takumi, and I got there first, setting up
our sleeping bags on the softest bales of
hay. It was 6:30.
Alaska came shortly after, having
told the Eagle she was spending the
weekend with Jake. The Eagle didn't
check that story, because Alaska spent at
least one weekend there every month,
and he knew that her parents never
cared. Lara showed up half an hour
later. She'd told the Eagle that she was
driving to Atlanta to see an old friend
from Romania. The Eagle called Lara's
parents to make sure that they knew she
was spending a weekend off campus,
and they didn't mind.
"They trust me." She smiled.
"You don't sound like you have an
accent sometimes," I said, which was
pretty stupid, but a darn sight better than
throwing up on her.
"Eet's only soft i's."
"No soft i's in Russian?" I asked.
"Romanian," she corrected me.
Turns out Romanian is a language. Who
knew? My cultural sensitivity quotient
was going to have to drastically increase
if I was going to share a sleeping bag
with Lara anytime soon.
Everybody was sitting on sleeping
bags, Alaska smoking with flagrant
disregard for the overwhelming
flammability of the structure, when the
Colonel pulled out a single piece of
computer paper and read from it.
"The point of this evening's
festivities is to prove once and for all
that we are to pranking what the
Weekday Warriors are to sucking. But
we'll also have the opportunity to make
life unpleasant for the Eagle, which is
always a welcome pleasure. And so," he
said, pausing as if for a drumroll, "we
fight tonight a battle on three fronts:
"Front One: The pre-prank: We will, as
it were, light a fire under the Eagle's ass.
"Front Two: Operation Baldy:
Wherein Lara flies solo in a retaliatory
mission so elegant and cruel that it could
only have been the brainchild of, well,
me."
"Hey!" Alaska interrupted. "It was
my idea."
"Okay, fine. It was Alaska's idea."
He laughed. "And finally, Front Three:
The Progress Reports: We're going to
hack into the faculty computer network
and use their grading database to send
out letters to Kevin et al.'s families
saying that they are failing some of their
classes."
"We are definitely going to get
expelled," I said.
"I hope you didn't bring the Asian
kid along thinking he's a computer
genius. Because I am not," Takumi said.
"We're not going to get expelled and
I'm the computer genius. The rest of you
are muscle and distraction. We won't get
expelled even if we get caught because
there are no expellable offenses here —
well, except for the five bottles of
Strawberry Hill in Alaska's backpack,
and that will be well hidden. We're just,
you know, wreaking a little havoc."
The plan was laid out, and it left no
room for error. The Colonel relied so
heavily on perfect synchronicity that if
one of us messed up even slightly, the
endeavor would collapse entirely.
He had printed up individual
itineraries for each of us, including times
exact to the second. Our watches
synchronized, our clothes black, our
backpacks on, our breath visible in the
cold, our minds filled with the minute
details of the plan, our hearts racing, we
walked out of the barn together once it
was completely dark, around seven. The
five of us walking confidently in a row,
I'd never felt cooler. The Great Perhaps
was upon us, and we were invincible.
The plan may have had faults, but we did
not.
After five minutes, we split up to go
to our destinations. I stuck with Takumi.
We were the distraction.
"We're the fucking Marines," he
said. "First to fight. First to die," I agreed
nervously.
"Hell yes."
He stopped and opened his bag.
"Not here, dude," I said. "We have to
go to the Eagle's."
"I know. I know. Just — hold on."
He pulled out a thick headband. It was
brown, with a plush fox head on the
front. He put it on hishead.
I laughed. "What the hell is that?"
"It's my fox hat."
"Your fox hat?"
"Yeah, Pudge. My fox hat."
"Why are you wearing your fox
hat?" I asked.
"Because no one can catch the
motherfucking fox."
Two minutes later, we were
crouched behind the trees fifty feet from
the Eagle's back door. My heart thumped
like a techno drumbeat.
"Thirty seconds," Takumi
whispered, and I felt the same spooked
nervousness that I had felt that first night
with Alaska when she grabbed my hand
and whispered run run run run run. But
I stayed put.
I thought: We are not close enough.
I thought: He will not hear it.
I thought: He will hear it and be out
so fast that we will have no chance.
I thought: Twenty seconds. I was
breathing hard and fast.
"Hey, Pudge," Takumi whispered,
"you can do this, dude. It's just running."
"Right." Just running. My knees are
good. My lungs are fair. It's just
running.
"Five," he said. "Four. Three. Two.
One. Light it. Light it. Light it."
It lit with a sizzle that reminded me
of every July Fourth with my family. We
stood still for a nanosecond, staring at
the fuse, making sure it was lit. And now,
I thought. Now. Run run run run run.
But my body didn't move until I heard
Takumi shout-whisper, "Go go go
fucking go."
And we went.
Three seconds later, a huge burst of
pops. It sounded, to me, like the
automatic gunfire in Decapitation, except
louder. We were twenty steps away
already, and I thought my eardrums
would burst.
I thought: Well, he will certainly
hear it.
We ran past the soccer field and into
the woods, running uphill and with only
the vaguest sense of direction. In the
dark, fallen branches and moss-covered
rocks appeared at the last possible
second, and I slipped and fell repeatedly
and worried that the Eagle would catch
up, but I just kept getting up and running
beside Takumi, away from the
classrooms and the dorm circle. We ran
like we had golden shoes. I ran like a
cheetah — well, like a cheetah that
smoked too much. And then, after
precisely one minute of running, Takumi
stopped and ripped open his backpack.
My turn to count down. Staring at my
watch. Terrified. By now, he was surely
out. He was surely running. I wondered
if he was fast. He was old, but he'd be
mad. "Five four three two one," and the
sizzle. We didn't pause that time, just
ran, still west. Breath heaving. I
wondered if I could do this for thirty
minutes. The firecrackers exploded.
The pops ended, and a voice cried
out, "STOP RIGHT NOW!" But we did
not stop. Stopping was not in the plan.
"I'm the motherfucking fox," Takumi
whispered, both to himself and to me.
"No one can catch the fox."
A minute later, I was on the ground.
Takumi counted down. The fuse lit. We
ran.
But it was a dud. We had prepared
for one dud, bringing an extra string of
firecrackers. Another, though, would
cost the Colonel and Alaska a minute.
Takumi crouched down on the ground, lit
the fuse, and ran. The popping started.
The fireworks bangbangbanged in sync
with my heartbeat.
When the firecrackers finished, I
heard, "STOP OR I'LL CALL THE
POLICE!" And though the voice was
distant, I could feel his Look of Doom
bearing down on me.
"The pigs can't stop the fox; I'm too
quick," Takumi said to himself. "I can
rhyme while I run; I'm that slick."
The Colonel warned us about the
police threat, told us not to worry. The
Eagle didn't like to bring the police to
campus. Bad publicity. So we ran. Over
and under and through all manner of
trees and bushes and branches. We fell.
We got up. We ran. If he couldn't follow
us with the firecrackers, he could sure as
hell follow the sound of our whispered
shits as we tripped over dead logs and
fell into briar bushes.
One minute. I knelt down, lit the
fuse, ran. Bang.
Then we turned north, thinking we'd
gotten past the lake. This was key to the
plan. The farther we got while still
staying on campus, the farther the Eagle
would follow us. The farther he
followed us, the farther he would be
from the classrooms, where the Colonel
and Alaska were working their magic.
And then we planned to loop back near
the classrooms and swing east along the
creek until we came to the bridge over
our Smoking Hole, where we would
rejoin the road and walk back to the
barn, triumphant.
But here's the thing: We made a
slight error in navigation. We weren't
past the lake; instead we were staring at
a field and then the lake. Too close to
the classrooms to run anywhere but
along the lake front, I looked over at
Takumi, who was running with me stride
for stride, and he just said, "Drop one
now."
So I dropped down, lit the fuse, and
we ran. We were running through a
clearing now, and if the Eagle was
behind us, he could see us. We got to the
south corner of the lake and started
running along the shore. The lake wasn't
all that big — maybe a quarter mile
long, so we didn't have far to go when I
saw it.
The swan.
Swimming toward us like a swan
possessed. Wings flapping furiously as it
came, and then it was on the shore in
front of us, making a noise that sounded
like nothing else in this world, like all
the worst parts of a dying rabbit plus all
the worst parts of a crying baby, and
there was no other way, so we just ran. I
hit the swan at a full run and felt it bite
into my ass. And then I was running with
a noticeable limp, because my ass was
on fire, and I thought to myself, What the
hell is in swan saliva that burns so
badly?
The twenty-third string was a dud,
costing us one minute. At that point, I
wanted a minute. I was dying. The
burning sensation in my left buttock had
dulled to an intense aching, magnified
each time I landed on my left leg, so I
was running like an injured gazelle
trying to evade a pride of lions. Our
speed, needless to say, had slowed
considerably. We hadn't heard the Eagle
since we got across the lake, but I didn't
think he had turned around. He was
trying to lull us into complacency, but it
would not work. Tonight, we were
invincible.
Exhausted, we stopped with three
strings left and hoped we'd given the
Colonel enough time. We ran for a few
more minutes, until we found the bank of
the creek. It was so dark and so still that
the tiny stream of water seemed to roar,
but I could still hear our hard, fast
breaths as we collapsed on wet clay and
pebbles beside the creek. Only when we
stopped did I look at Takumi. His face
and arms were scratched, the fox head
now directly over his left ear. Looking at
my own arms, I noticed blood dripping
from the deeper cuts. There were, I
remembered now, some wicked briar
patches, but I was feeling no pain.
Takumi picked thorns out of his leg.
"The fox is fucking tired," he said, and
laughed.
"The swan bit my ass," I told him.
"I saw." He smiled. "Is it bleeding?"
I reached my hand into my pants to
check. No blood, so I smoked to
celebrate.
"Mission accomplished," I said.
"Pudge, my friend, we are
indefuckingstructible."
We couldn't figure out where we
were, because the creek doubles back so
many times through the campus, so we
followed the creek for about ten minutes,
figuring we walked half as fast as we
ran, and then turned left.
"Left, you think?" Takumi asked.
"I'm pretty lost," I said.
"The fox is pointing left. So left."
And, sure enough, the fox took us right
back to the barn.
"You're okay!" Lara said as we
walked up. "I was worried. I saw the
Eagle run out of hees house. He was
wearing pajamas. He sure looked mad."
I said, "Well, if he was mad then, I
wouldn't want to see him now."
"What took you so long?" she asked
me.
"We took the long way home,"
Takumi said. "Plus Pudge is walking
like an old lady with hemorrhoids 'cause
the swan bit him on the ass. Where's
Alaska and the Colonel?"
"I don't know," Lara said, and then
we heard footsteps in the distance,
mutters and cracking branches. In a
flash, Takumi grabbed our sleeping bags
and backpacks and hid them behind
bales of hay. The three of us ran through
the back of the barn and into the waisthigh
grass, and lay down. He tracked us
back to the barn, I thought. We fucked
everything up.
But then I heard the Colonel's voice,
distinct and very annoyed, saying,
"Because it narrows the list of possible
suspects by twenty-three! Why couldn't
you just follow the plan? Christ, where
is everybody?"
We walked back to the barn, a bit
sheepish from having overreacted. The
Colonel sat down on a bale of hay, his
elbows on his knees, his head bowed,
his palms against his forehead. Thinking.
"Well, we haven't been caught yet,
anyway. Okay, first," he said without
looking up, "tell me everything else went
all right. Lara?"
She started talking. "Yes. Good."
"Can I have some more detail,
please?"
"I deed like your paper said. I stayed
behind the Eagle's house until I saw
heem run after Miles and Takumi, and
then I ran behind the dorms. And then I
went through the weendow eento
Keveen's room. Then I put the stuff een
the gel and the conditioner, and then I
deed the same thing een Jeff and
Longwell's room."
"The stuff?" I asked.
"Undiluted industrial-strength blue
number-five hair dye," Alaska said.
"Which I bought with your cigarette
money. Apply it to wet hair, and it won't
wash out for months."
"We dyed their hair blue?"
"Well, technically," the Colonel
said, still speaking into his lap, "they're
going to dye their own hair blue. But we
have certainly made it easier for them. I
know you and Takumi did all right,
because we're here and you're here, so
you did your job. And the good news is
that the three assholes who had the gall
to prank us have progress reports
coming saying that they are failing three
classes."
"Uh-oh. What's the bad news?" Lara
asked.
"Oh, c'mon," Alaska said. "The
other good news is that while the
Colonel was worried he'd heard
something and ran into the woods, I saw
to it that twenty other Weekday Warriors
also have progress reports coming. I
printed out reports for all of them,
stuffed them into metered school
envelopes, and then put then in the
mailbox." She turned to the Colonel.
"You were sure gone a long time," she
said. "The wittle Colonel: so scared of
getting expelled."
The Colonel stood up, towering over
the rest of us as we sat. "That is not good
news! That was not in the plan!
That means there are twenty-three
people who the Eagle can eliminate as
suspects. Twenty-three people who
might figure out it was us and rat!"
"If that happens," Alaska said very
seriously, "I'll take the fall."
"Right." The Colonel sighed. "Like
you took the fall for Paul and Marya.
You'll say that while you were traipsing
through the woods lighting firecrackers
you were simultaneously hacking into the
faculty network and printing out false
progress reports on school stationery?
Because I'm sure that will fly with
the Eagle!"
"Relax, dude," Takumi said. "First
off, we're not gonna get caught. Second
off, if we do, I'll take the fall with
Alaska. You've got more to lose than any
of us." The Colonel just nodded. It was
an undeniable fact: The Colonel would
have no chance at a scholarship to a
good school if he got expelled from the
Creek.
Knowing that nothing cheered up the
Colonel like acknowledging his
brilliance, I asked, "So how'd you hack
the network?"
"I climbed in the window of Dr.
Hyde's office, booted up his computer,
and I typed in his password," he said,
smiling.
"You guessed it?"
"No. On Tuesday I went into his
office and asked him to print me a copy
of the recommended reading list. And
then I watched him type the password:
J3ckylnhyd3."
"Well, shit," Takumi said. "I could
have done that."
"Sure, but then you wouldn't have
gotten to wear that sexy hat," the Colonel
said, laughing. Takumi took the
headband off and put it in his bag.
"Kevin is going to be pissed about
his hair," I said.
"Yeah, well, I'm really pissed about
my waterlogged library. Kevin is a
blowup doll," Alaska said. "Prick us,
we bleed. Prick him, he pops."
"It's true," said Takumi. "The guy is
a dick. He kind of tried to kill you, after
all."
"Yeah, I guess," I acknowledged.
"There are a lot of people here like
that," Alaska went on, still fuming. "You
know? Fucking blowup-doll rich kids."
But even though Kevin had sort of
tried to kill me and all, he really didn't
seem worth hating. Hating the cool kids
takes an awful lot of energy, and I'd
given up on it a long time ago. For me,
the prank was just a response to a
previous prank, just a golden opportunity
to, as the Colonel said, wreak a little
havoc. But to Alaska, it seemed to be
something else, something more.
I wanted to ask her about it, but she
lay back down behind the piles of hay,
invisible again. Alaska was done
talking, and when she was done talking,
that was it. We didn't coax her out for
two hours, until the Colonel unscrewed a
bottle of wine. We passed around the
bottle till I could feel it in my stomach,
sour and warm.
I wanted to like booze more than I
actually did (which is more or less the
precise opposite of how I felt about
Alaska). But that night, the booze felt
great, as the warmth of the wine in my
stomach spread through my body. I didn't
like feeling stupid or out of control, but I
liked the way it made everything
(laughing, crying, peeing in front of your
friends) easier. Why did we drink? For
me, it was just fun, particularly since we
were risking expulsion.
The nice thing about the constant
threat of expulsion at Culver Creek is
that it lends excitement to every moment
of illicit pleasure. The bad thing, of
course, is that there is always the
possibility of actual expulsion.
two days before
I woke up early the next morning, my
lips dry and my breath visible in the
crisp air. Takumi had brought a camp
stove in his backpack, and the Colonel
was huddled over it, heating instant
coffee. The sun shone bright but could
not combat the cold, and I sat with the
Colonel and sipped the coffee ("The
thing about instant coffee is that it smells
pretty good but tastes like stomach bile,"
the Colonel said), and then one by one,
Takumi and Lara and Alaska woke up,
and we spent the day hiding out, but
loudly. Hiding out loud.
At the barn that afternoon, Takumi
decided we needed to have a freestyle
contest. "You start, Pudge," Takumi said.
"Colonel Catastrophe, you're our beat
box." "Dude, I can't rap," I pled.
"That's okay. The Colonel can't drop
beats, either. Just try and rhyme a little
and then send it over to me."
With his hand cupped over his
mouth, the Colonel started to make
absurd noises that sounded more like
farting than bass beats, and I, uh, rapped.
"Um, we're sittin' in the barn and the
sun's goin' down / when I was a kid at
Burger King I wore a crown / dude, I
can't rhyme for shit / so I'll let my boy
Takumi rip it."
Takumi took over without pausing.
"Damn, Pudge, I'm not sure I'm quite
ready / but like Nightmare on Elm
Street's Freddy / I've always got the
goods to rip shit up / last night I drank
wine it was like hiccup hiccup / the
Colonel's beats are sick like malaria /
when I rock the mike the ladies suffer
hysteria / I represent Japan as well as
Birmingham / when I was a kid they
called me yellow man / but I ain't
ashamed a' my skin color / and neither
are the countless bitches that call me
lover."
Alaska jumped in.
"Oh shit did you just diss the
feminine gender / I'll pummel your ass
then stick you in a blender / you think I
like Tori and Ani so I can't rhyme / but I
got flow like Ghostbusters got slime /
objectify women and it's fuckin' on /
you'll be dead and gone like ancient
Babylon."
Takumi picked it up again.
"If my eye offends me I will pluck it
out / I got props for girls like old men
got gout / oh shit now my rhyming got all
whack / Lara help me out and pick up the
slack."
Lara rhymed quietly and nervously
— and with even more flagrant
disregard for the beat than me. "My
name's Lara and I'm from Romania /
thees is pretty hard, um, I once visited
Albania / I love riding in Alaska's Geo /
My two best vowels in English are EO I
I'm not so good weeth the leetle i's / but
they make me sound cosmopoleeteen,
right? / Oh, Takumi, I think I'm done /
end thees game weeth some fun."
"I drop bombs like Hiroshima, or
better yet Nagasaki / when girls hear me
flow they think that I'm Rocky / to
represent my homeland I still drink sake
/ the kids don't get my rhymin' so
sometimes they mock me / my build ain't
small but I wouldn't call it stocky / then
again, unlike Pudge, I'm not super gawky
/ I'm the fuckin' fox and this is my crew /
our freestyle's infused with funk like my
gym shoes. And we're out."
The Colonel rapped it up with
freestyle beat-boxing, and we gave
ourselves a round of applause.
"You ripped it up, Alaska," Takumi
says, laughing.
"I do what I can to represent the
ladies. Lara had my back."
"Yeah, I deed."
And then Alaska decided that
although it wasn't nearly dark yet, it was
time for us to get shitfaced.
"Two nights in a row is maybe
pushing our luck," Takumi said as
Alaska opened the wine.
"Luck is for suckers." She smiled
and put the bottle to her lips. We had
saltines and a hunk of Cheddar cheese
provided by the Colonel for dinner, and
sipping the warm pink wine out of the
bottle with our cheese and saltines made
for a fine dinner. And when we ran out
of cheese, well, all the more room for
Strawberry Hill.
"We have to slow down or I'll
puke," I remarked after we finished the
first bottle.
"I'm sorry, Pudge. I wasn't aware
that someone was holding open your
throat and pouring wine down it," the
Colonel responded, tossing me a bottle
of Mountain Dew.
"It's a little charitable to call this shit
wine," Takumi cracked.
And then, as if out of nowhere,
Alaska announced, "Best Day/Worst
Day!"
"Huh?" I asked.
"We are all going to puke if we just
drink. So we'll slow it down with a
drinking game. Best Day/Worst Day."
"Never heard of it," the Colonel
said. "'Cause I just made it up." She
smiled. She lay on her side across two
bales of hay, the afternoon light
brightening the green in her eyes, her tan
skin the last memory of fall. With her
mouth half open, it occurred to me that
she must already be drunk as I noticed
the far-off look in her eyes. The
thousand-yard stare of intoxication, I
thought, and as I watched her with an
idle fascination, it occurred to me that,
yeah, I was a little drunk, too.
"Fun! What are the rules?" Lara
asked.
"Everybody tells the story of their
best day. The best storyteller doesn't
have to drink. Then everybody tells the
story of their worst day, and the best
storyteller doesn't have to drink. Then
we keep going, second best day, second
worst day, until one of y'all quits."
"How do you know it'll be one of
us?" Takumi asked.
"'Cause I'm the best drinker and the
best storyteller," she answered. Hard to
disagree with that logic. "You start,
Pudge. Best day of your life."
"Urn. Can I take a minute to think of
one?"
"Couldn'ta been that good if you
have to think about it," the Colonel said.
"Fuck you, dude."
"Touchy."
"Best day of my life was today," I
said. "And the story is that I woke up
next to a very pretty Hungarian girl and
it was cold but not too cold and I had a
cup of lukewarm instant coffee and ate
Cheerios without milk and then walked
through the woods with Alaska and
Takumi. We skipped stones across the
creek, which sounds dumb but it wasn't.
I don't know. Like the way the sun is
right now, with the long shadows and
that kind of bright, soft light you get
when the sun isn't quite setting? That's
the light that makes everything better,
everything prettier, and today, everything
just seemed to be in that light. I mean, I
didn't do anything. But just sitting here,
even if I'm watching the Colonel whittle,
or whatever. Whatever. Great day.
Today. Best day of my life."
"You think I'm pretty?" Lara said,
and laughed, bashful. I thought, It'd be
good to make eye contact with her now,
but I couldn't. "And I'm Romaneean!"
"That story ended up being a hell of
a lot better than I thought it would be,"
Alaska said, "but I've still got you beat."
"Bring it on, baby," I said. A breeze
picked up, the tall grass outside the barn
tilting away from it, and I pulled my
sleeping bag over my shoulders to stay
warm.
"Best day of my life was January 9,
1997. I was eight years old, and my mom
and I went to the zoo on a class trip.
I liked the bears. She liked the
monkeys. Best day ever. End of story."
"That's it?!" the Colonel said. "That's
the best day of your whole life?!"
"Yup."
"I liked eet," Lara said. "I like the
monkeys, too."
"Lame," said the Colonel. I didn't
think it was lame so much as more of
Alaska's intentional vagueness, another
example of her furthering her own
mysteriousness. But still, even though I
knew it was intentional, I couldn't help
but wonder: What's so fucking great
about the zoo? But before I could ask,
Lara spoke.
"'Kay, my turn," said Lara. "Eet's
easy. The day I came here. I knew
Engleesh and my parents deedn't, and we
came off the airplane and my relatives
were here, aunts and uncles I had not
ever seen, in the airport, and my parents
were so happy. I was twelve, and I had
always been the leetle baby, but that was
the first day that my parents needed me
and treated me like a grown-up. Because
they did not know the language, right?
They need me to order food and to
translate tax and immigration forms and
everytheeng else, and that was the day
they stopped treating me like a keed.
Also, in Romania, we were poor. And
here, we're kinda reech." She laughed.
"All right." Takumi smiled, grabbing
the bottle of wine. "I lose. Because the
best day of my life was the day I lost my
virginity. And if you think I'm going to
tell you that story, you're gonna have to
get me drunker than this."
"Not bad," the Colonel said. "That's
not bad. Want to know my best day?"
"That's the game, Chip," Alaska said,
clearly annoyed.
"Best day of my life hasn't happened
yet. But I know it. I see it every day. The
best day of my life is the day I buy my
mom a huge fucking house. And not just
like out in the woods, but in the middle
of Mountain Brook, with all the
Weekday Warriors' parents. With all
y'all's parents. And I'm not buying it with
a mortgage either. I'm buying it with cash
money, and I am driving my mom there,
and I'm going to open her side of the car
door and she'll get out and look at this
house — this house is like picket fence
and two stories and everything, you
know — and I'm going to hand her the
keys to her house and I'll say, 'Thanks.'
Man, she helped fill out my application
to this place.
And she let me come here, and that's
no easy thing when you come from
where we do, to let your son go away to
school. So that's the best day of my life."
Takumi tilted the bottle up and
swallowed a few times, then handed it to
me. I drank, and so did Lara, and then
Alaska put her head back and turned the
bottle upside down, quickly downing the
last quarter of the bottle.
As she unscrewed the next bottle,
Alaska smiled at the Colonel. "You won
that round. Now what's your worst day?"
"Worst day was when my dad left.
He's old — he's like seventy now — and
he was old when he married my mom,
and he still cheated on her. And she
caught him, and she got pissed, so he hit
her. And then she kicked him out, and he
left. I was here, and my mom called, and
she didn't tell me the whole story with
the cheating and everything and the
hitting until later. She just said that he
was gone and not coming back. And I
haven't seen him since. All that day, I
kept waiting for him to call me and
explain it, but he never did. He never
called at all. I at least thought he would
say good-bye or something. That was the
worst day."
"Shit, you got me beat again," I said.
"My worst day was in seventh grade,
when Tommy Hewitt pissed on my gym
clothes and then the gym teacher said I
had to wear my uniform or I'd fail the
class. Seventh-grade gym, right? There
are worse things to fail. But it was a big
deal then, and I was crying, and trying to
explain to the teacher what happened,
but it was so embarrassing, and he just
yelled and yelled and yelled until I put
on these piss-soaked shorts and T-shirt.
That was the day I stopped caring what
people did. I just never cared anymore,
about being a loser or not having friends
or any of that. So I guess it was good for
me in a way, but that moment was awful.
I mean, imagine me playing volleyball or
whatever in pee-soaked gym clothes
while Tommy Hewitt tells everyone
what he did. That was the worst day."
Lara was laughing. "I'm sorry,
Miles."
"All good," I said. "Just tell me
yours so I can laugh at your pain," and I
smiled, and we laughed together.
"My worst day was probably the
same day as my best. Because I left
everytheeng. I mean, eet sounds dumb,
but my childhood, too, because most
twelve-year-olds do not, you know, have
to feegure out W-2 forms."
"What's a W-2 form?" I asked.
"That's my point. Eet's for taxes. So.
Same day."
Lara had always needed to talk for
her parents, I thought, and so maybe she
never learned how to talk for herself.
And I wasn't great at talking for
myself either. We had something
important in common, then, a personality
quirk I didn't share with Alaska or
anybody else, although almost by
definition Lara and I couldn't express it
to each other. So maybe it was just the
way the not-yet-setting sun shone against
her lazy dark curls, but at that moment, I
wanted to kiss her, and we did not need
to talk in order to kiss, and the puking on
her jeans and the months of mutual
avoidance melted away.
"Eet's your turn, Takumi."
"Worst day of my life," Takumi said.
"June 9, 2000. My grandmother died in
Japan. She died in a car accident, and I
was supposed to leave to go see her two
days later. I was going to spend the
whole summer with her and my
grandfather, but instead I flew over for
her funeral, and the only time I really
saw what she looked like, I mean other
than in pictures, was at her funeral. She
had a Buddhist funeral, and they
cremated her, but before they did she
was on this, like — well, it's not really
Buddhist. I mean, religion is
complicated there, so it's a little
Buddhist and a little Shinto, but y'all
don't care — point being that she was on
this, like, funeral pyre or whatever. And
that's the only time I ever saw her, was
just before they burned her up. That was
the worst day."
The Colonel lit a cigarette, threw it
to me, and lit one of his own. It was
eerie, that he could tell when I wanted a
cigarette. We were like an old married
couple. For a moment, I thought. It's
massively unwise to throw lit cigarettes
around a barn full of hay, but then the
moment of caution passed, and I just
made a sincere effort not to flick ash
onto any hay.
"No clear winner yet," the Colonel
said. "The field is wide open. Your turn,
buddy."
Alaska lay on her back, her hands
locked behind her head. She spoke softly
and quickly, but the quiet day was
becoming a quieter night — the bugs
gone now with the arrival of winter —
and we could hear her clearly.
"The day after my mom took me to
the zoo where she liked the monkeys and
I liked the bears, it was a Friday. I came
home from school. She gave me a hug
and told me to go do my homework in
my room so I could watch TV later. I
went into my room, and she sat down at
the kitchen table, I guess, and then she
screamed, and I ran out, and she had
fallen over. She was lying on the floor,
holding her head and jerking. And I
freaked out. I should have called 911,
but I just started screaming and crying
until finally she stopped jerking, and I
thought she had fallen asleep and that
whatever had hurt didn't hurt anymore.
So I just sat there on the floor with her
until my dad got home an hour later, and
he's screaming, 'Why didn't you call
911?' and trying to give her CPR, but by
then she was plenty dead. Aneurysm.
Worst day. I win. You drink."
And so we did.
No one talked for a minute, and then
Takumi asked, "Your dad blamed you?"
"Well, not after that first moment.
But yeah. How could he not?"
"Well, you were a little kid," Takumi
argued. I was too surprised and
uncomfortable to talk, trying to fit this
into what I knew about Alaska's family.
Her mom told her the knock-knock joke
— when Alaska was six. Her mom used
to smoke — but didn't anymore,
obviously.
"Yeah. I was a little kid. Little kids
can dial 911. They do it all the time.
Give me the wine," she said, deadpan
and emotionless. She drank without
lifting her head from the hay.
"I'm sorry," Takumi said.
"Why didn't you ever tell me?" the
Colonel asked, his voice soft.
"It never came up." And then we
stopped asking questions. What the hell
do you say?
In the long quiet that followed, as we
passed around the wine and slowly
became drunker, I found myself thinking
about President William McKinley, the
third American president to be
assassinated. He lived for several days
after he was shot, and toward the end,
his wife started crying and screaming, "I
want to go, too! I want to go, too!" And
with his last measure of strength,
McKinley turned to her and spoke his
last words: "We are all going."
It was the central moment of
Alaska's life. When she cried and told
me that she fucked everything up, I knew
what she meant now. And when she said
she failed everyone, I knew whom she
meant. It was the everything and the
everyone of her life, and so I could not
help but imagine it: I imagined a
scrawny eight-year-old with dirty
fingers, looking down at her mother
convulsing. So she sat down with her
dead-or-maybe-not mother, who I
imagine was not breathing by then but
wasn't yet cold either. And in the time
between dying and death, a little Alaska
sat with her mother in silence. And then
through the silence and my drunkenness,
I caught a glimpse of her as she might
have been. She must have come to feel
so powerless, I thought, that the one
thing she might have done — pick up the
phone and call an ambulance — never
even occurred to her. There comes a
time when we realize that our parents
cannot save themselves or save us, that
everyone who wades through time
eventually gets dragged out to sea by the
undertow — that, in short, we are all
going.
So she became impulsive, scared by
her inaction into perpetual action. When
the Eagle confronted her with expulsion,
maybe she blurted out Marya's name
because it was the first that came to
mind, because in that moment she didn't
want to get expelled and couldn't think
past that moment. She was scared, sure.
But more importantly, maybe she'd been
scared of being paralyzed by fear again.
"We are all going," McKinley said
to his wife, and we sure are. There's
your labyrinth of suffering. We are all
going. Find your way out of that maze.
None of which I said out loud to her.
Not then and not ever. We never said
another word about it. Instead, it became
just another worst day, albeit the worst
of the bunch, and as night fell fast, we
continued on, drinking and joking.
Later that night, after Alaska stuck
her finger down her throat and made
herself puke in front of all of us because
she was too drunk towalk into the
woods, I lay down in my sleeping bag.
Lara was lying beside me, in her bag,
which was almost touching mine. I
moved my arm to the edge of my bag and
pushed it so it slightly overlapped with
hers. I pressed my hand against hers. I
could feel it, although there were two
sleeping bags between us. My plan,
which struck me as very slick, was to
pull my arm out of my sleeping bag and
put it into hers, and then hold her hand. It
was a good plan, but when I tried to
actually get my arm out of the mummy
bag, I flailed around like a fish out of
water, and nearly dislocated my
shoulder. She was laughing — and not
with me, at me — but we still didn't
speak. Having passed the point of no
return, I slid my hand into her sleeping
bag anyway, and she stifled a giggle as
my fingers traced a line from her elbow
to her wrist.
"That teekles," she whispered. So
much for me being sexy.
"Sorry," I whispered.
"No, it's a nice teekle," she said, and
held my hand. She laced her fingers in
mine and squeezed. And then she rolled
over and keessed me. I am sure that she
tasted like stale booze, but I did not
notice, and I'm sure I tasted like stale
booze and cigarettes, but she didn't
notice. We were kissing.
I thought: This is good.
I thought: I am not bad at this
kissing. Not bad at all.
I thought: I am clearly the greatest
kisser in the history of the universe.
Suddenly she laughed and pulled
away from me. She wiggled a hand out
of her sleeping bag and wiped her face.
"You slobbered on my nose," she
said, and laughed.
I laughed, too, trying to give her the
impression that my nose-slobbering
kissing style was intended to be funny.
"I'm sorry." To borrow the base
system from Alaska, I hadn't hit more
than five singles in my entire life, so I
tried to chalk it up to inexperience. "I'm
a bit new at this," I said.
"Eet was a nice slobbering," she
said, laughed, and kissed me again. Soon
we were entirely out of our sleeping
bags, making out quietly. She lay on top
of me, and I held her small waist in my
hands. I could feel her breasts against
my chest, and she moved slowly on top
of me, her legs straddling me. "You feel
nice," she said.
"You're beautiful," I said, and smiled
at her. In the dark, I could make out the
outline of her face and her large, round
eyes blinking down at me, her eyelashes
almost fluttering against my forehead.
"Could the two people who are
making out please be quiet?" the Colonel
asked loudly from his sleeping bag.
"Those of us who are not making out
are drunk and tired."
"Mostly. Drunk," Alaska said
slowly, as if enunciation required great
effort. We had almost never talked, Lara
and I, and we didn't get a chance to talk
anymore because of the Colonel. So we
kissed quietly and laughed softly with
our mouths and our eyes. After so much
kissing that it almost started to get
boring, I whispered, "Do you want to be
my girlfriend?" And she said, "Yes
please," and smiled. We slept together in
her sleeping bag, which felt a little
crowded, to be honest, but was still
nice. I had never felt another person
against me as I slept. It was a fine end to
the best day of my life.
one day before
The next morning,a term I use
loosely since it was not yet dawn, the
Colonel shook me awake. Lara was
wrapped in my arms, folded into my
body.
"We gotta go, Pudge. Time to roll
up."
"Dude. Sleeping."
"You can sleep after we check in.
IT'S TIME TO GO!" he shouted.
"All right. All right. No screaming.
Head hurts." And it did. I could feel last
night's wine in my throat and my head
throbbed like it had the morning after my
concussion. My mouth tasted like a
skunk had crawled into my throat and
died. I made an effort not to exhale near
Lara as she groggily extricated herself
from the sleeping bag.
We packed everything quickly, threw
our empty bottles into the tall grass of
the field — littering was an unfortunate
necessity at the Creek, since no one
wanted to throw an empty bottle of
booze in a campus trash can — and
walked away from the barn. Lara
grabbed my hand and then shyly let go.
Alaska looked like a train wreck, but
insisted on pouring the last few sips of
Strawberry Hill into her cold instant
coffee before chucking the bottle behind
her.
"Hair of the dog," she said.
"How ya doin'?" the Colonel asked
her.
"I've had better mornings."
"Hungover?"
"Like an alcoholic preacher on
Sunday morning."
"Maybe you shouldn't drink so
much," I suggested.
"Pudge." She shook her head and
sipped the cold coffee and wine. "Pudge,
what you must understand about me is
that I am a deeply unhappy person."
We walked side by side down the
washed-out dirt road on our way back to
campus. Just after we reached the
bridge, Takumi stopped, said "uh-oh,"
got on his hands and knees, and puked a
volcano of yellow and pink.
"Let it out," Alaska said. "You'll be
fine." He finished, stood up, and said, "I
finally found something that can stop the
fox. The fox cannot summit Strawberry
Hill."
Alaska and Lara walked to their
rooms, planning to check in with the
Eagle later in the day, while Takumi and
I stood behind the Colonel as he knocked
on the Eagle's door at 9:00 a.m.
"Y'all are home early. Have fun?"
"Yes sir," the Colonel said.
"How's your mom, Chip?"
"She's doing well, sir. She's in good
shape."
"She feed y'all well?"
"Oh yes sir," I said. "She tried to
fatten me up."
"You need it. Y'all have a good
day."
"Well, I don't think he suspected
anything," the Colonel said on our way
back to Room 43. "So maybe we
actually pulled it off." I thought about
going over to see Lara, but I was pretty
tired, so I just went to bed and slept
through my hangover.
It was not an eventful day. I should
have done extraordinary things. I should
have sucked the marrow out of life.
But on that day, I slept eighteen
hours out of a possible twenty-four.
the last day
The next morning,the first Monday of
the new semester, the Colonel came out
of the shower just as my alarm went off.
As I pulled on my shoes, Kevin knocked
once and then opened the door, stepping
inside. "You're looking good," the
Colonel said casually. Kevin's now
sported a crew cut, a small patch of
short blue hair on each side of his head,
just above the ear. His lower lip jutted
out — the morning's first dip. He walked
over to ourcoffee table, picked up a can
of Coke, and spit into it.
"You almost didn't get me. I noticed
it in my conditioner and got right back in
the shower. But I didn't notice it in my
gel. It didn't show up in Jeff's hair at all.
But Longwell and me, we had to go with
the Marine look. Thank God I have
clippers."
"It suits you," I said, although it
didn't. The short hair accentuated his
features, specifically his too-closetogether
beady eyes, which did not stand
up well to accentuation. The Colonel
was trying hard to look tough — ready
for whatever Kevin might do — but it's
hard to look tough when you're only
wearing an orange towel.
"Truce?"
"Well, your troubles aren't over, I'm
afraid," the Colonel said, referring to the
mailed-but-not-yet-received progress
reports.
"A'ight. If you say so. We'll talk
when it's over, I guess."
"I guess so," the Colonel said. As
Kevin walked out, the Colonel said,
"Take the can you spit in, you unhygienic
shit." Kevin just closed the door behind
him. The Colonel grabbed the can,
opened the door, and threw it at Kevin
— missing him by a good margin.
"Jeez, go easy on the guy."
"No truce yet. Pudge."
I spent that afternoon with Lara. We
were very cutesy, even though we didn't
know the first thing about each other and
barely talked. But we made out. She
grabbed my butt at one point, and I sort
of jumped. I was lying down, but I did
the best version of jumping that one can
do lying down, and she said, "Sorry,"
and I said, "No, it's okay. It's just a little
sore from the swan."
We walked to the TV room together,
and I locked the door. We were
watching The Brady Bunch, which she
had never seen. The episode, where the
Bradys visit the gold-mining ghost town
and they all get locked up in the oneroom
jail by some crazy old gold panner
with a scraggly white beard, was
especially horrible, and gave us a lot to
laugh about. Which is good, since we
didn't have much to talk about.
Just as the Bradys were getting
locked in jail, Lara randomly asked me,
"Have you ever gotten a blow job?"
"Urn, that's out of the blue," I said.
"The blue?"
"Like, you know, out of left field."
"Left field?"
"Like, in baseball. Like, out of
nowhere. I mean, what made you think of
that?"
"I've just never geeven one," she
answered, her little voice dripping with
seductiveness. It was so brazen. I
thought I would explode. I never thought.
I mean, from Alaska, hearing that stuff
was one thing. But to hear her sweet
little Romanian voice go so sexy all of
the sudden…
"No," I said. "I never have."
"Think it would be fun?"
DO I!?!?!?!?!?!?!"Urn. yeah. I mean,
you don't have to."
"I think I want to," she said, and we
kissed a little, and then. And then with
me sitting watching The Brady Bunch,
watching Marcia Marcia Marcia up to
her Brady antics, Lara unbuttoned my
pants and pulled my boxers down a little
and pulled out my penis.
"Wow," she said.
"What?"
She looked up at me, but didn't
move, her face nanometers away from
my penis. "It's weird."
"What do you mean weird?"
"Just beeg, I guess."
I could live with that kind of weird.
And then she wrapped her hand around it
and put it into her mouth.
And waited.
We were both very still. She did not
move a muscle in her body, and I did not
move a muscle in mine. I knew that at
this point something else was supposed
to happen, but I wasn't quite sure what.
She stayed still. I could feel her
nervous breath. For minutes, for as long
as it took the Bradys to steal the key and
unlock themselves from the ghost-town
jail, she lay there, stock-still with my
penis in her mouth, and I sat there,
waiting.
And then she took it out of her mouth
and looked up at me quizzically.
"Should I do sometheeng?"
"Urn. I don't know," I said.
Everything I'd learned from watching
porn with Alaska suddenly exited my
brain. I thought maybe she should move
her head up and down, but wouldn't that
choke her? So I just stayed quiet.
"Should I, like, bite?"
"Don't bite! I mean, I don't think. I
think — I mean, that felt good. That was
nice. I don't know if there's something
else."
"I mean, you deedn't—" "Urn. Maybe
we should ask Alaska."
So we went to her room and asked
Alaska. She laughed and laughed. Sitting
on her bed, she laughed until she cried.
She walked into the bathroom, returned
with a tube of toothpaste, and showed
us. In detail. Never have I so wanted to
be Crest Complete.
Lara and I went back to her room,
where she did exactly what Alaska told
her to do, and I did exactly what Alaska
said I would do, which was die a
hundred little ecstatic deaths, my fists
clenched, my body shaking. It was my
first orgasm with a girl, and afterward, I
was embarrassed and nervous, and so,
clearly, was Lara, who finally broke the
silence by asking, "So, want to do some
homework?"
There was little to do on the first day
of the semester, but she read for her
English class. I picked up a biography of
Argentinian revolutionary Che Guevara
— whose face adorned a poster on the
wall — that Lara's roommate had on her
bookshelf, then I lay down next to Lara
on the bottom bunk. I began at the end, as
I sometimes did with biographies I had
no intention of reading all the way
through, and found his last words
without too much searching. Captured by
the Bolivian army, Guevara said,
"Shoot, coward. You are only going to
kill a man." I thought back to Simon
Bolivar's last words in Garcia
Marquez's novel—"How will I ever get
out of this labyrinth!"
South American revolutionaries, it
would seem, died with flair. I read the
last words out loud to Lara. She turned
on her side, placing her head on my
chest.
"Why do you like last words so
much?"
Strange as it might seem, I'd never
really thought about why. "I don't know,"
I said, placing my hand against the small
of her back.
"Sometimes, just because they're
funny. Like in the Civil War, a general
named Sedgwick said, 'They couldn't hit
an elephant from this dis—' and then he
got shot." She laughed. "But a lot of
times, people die how they live. And so
last words tell me a lot about who
people were, and why they became the
sort of people biographies get written
about. Does that make sense?"
"Yeah," she said.
"Yeah?" Just yeah?
"Yeah," she said, and then went back
to reading.
I didn't know how to talk to her. And
I was frustrated with trying, so after a
little while, I got up to go.
I kissed her good-bye. I could do
that, at least.
I picked up Alaska and the Colonel
at our room and we walked down to the
bridge, where I repeated in
embarrassing detail the fellatio fiasco.
"I can't believe she went down on
you twice in one day," the Colonel said.
"Only technically. Really just once,"
Alaska corrected.
"Still. I mean. Still. Pudge got his
hog smoked."
"The poor Colonel," Alaska said
with a rueful smile. "I'd give you a pity
blow, but I really am attached to Jake."
"That's just creepy," the Colonel
said. "You're only supposed to flirt with
Pudge."
"But Pudge has a giiirrrrlllf riend."
She laughed.
That night, the Colonel and I walked
down to Alaska's room to celebrate our
Barn Night success. She and the Colonel
had been celebrating a lot the past
couple days, and I didn't feel up to
climbing Strawberry Hill, so I sat and
munched on pretzels while Alaska and
the Colonel drank wine from paper cups
with flowers on them.
"We ain't drinkin' out the bottle
tonight, nun," the Colonel said.
"We classin' it up!"
"It's an old-time Southern drinking
contest," Alaska responded.
"We's a-gonna treat Pudge to an
evening of real Southern livin': We go'n
match each other Dixie cup for Dixie
cup till the lesser drinker falls."
And that is pretty much what they
did, pausing only to turn out the lights at
11:00 so the Eagle wouldn't drop by.
They chatted some, but mostly they
drank, and I drifted out of the
conversation and ended up squinting
through the dark, looking at the book
spines in Alaska's Life Library. Even
minus the books she'd lost in the miniflood,
I could have stayed up until
morning reading through the haphazard
stacks of titles. A dozen white tulips in a
plastic vase were precariously perched
atop one of the book stacks, and when I
asked her about them, she just said,
"Jake and my's anniversary," and I didn't
care to continue that line of dialogue, so
I went back to scanning titles, and I was
just wondering how I could go about
learning Edgar Allan Poe's last words
(for the record: "Lord help my poor
soul") when I heard Alaska say, "Pudge
isn't even listening to us."
And I said, "I'm listening."
"We were just talking about Truth or
Dare. Played out in seventh grade or still
cool?"
"Never played it," I said. "No
friends in seventh grade."
"Well, that does it!" she shouted, a
bit too loud given the late hour and also
given the fact that she was openly
drinking wine in the room. "Truth or
Dare!"
"All right," I agreed, "but I'm not
making out with the Colonel."
The Colonel sat slumped in the
corner. "Can't make out. Too drunk."
Alaska started. "Truth or Dare,
Pudge."
"Dare."
"Hook up with me."
So I did.
It was that quick. I laughed, looked
nervous, and she leaned in and tilted her
head to the side, and we were kissing.
Zero layers between us. Our tongues
dancing back and forth in each other's
mouth until there was no her mouth and
my mouth but only our mouths
intertwined. She tasted like cigarettes
and Mountain Dew and wine and Chap
Stick. Her hand came to my face and I
felt her soft fingers tracing the line of my
jaw. We lay down as we kissed, she on
top of me, and I began to move beneath
her. I pulled away for a moment, to say,
"What is going on here?" and she put one
finger to her lips and we kissed again. A
hand grabbed one of mine and she
placed it on her stomach. I moved
slowly on top of her and felt her arching
her back fluidly beneath me.
I pulled away again. "What about
Lara? Jake?" Again, she sshed me. "Less
tongue, more lips," she said, and I tried
my best. I thought the tongue was the
whole point, but she was the expert.
"Christ," the Colonel said quite
loudly. "That wretched beast, drama,
draws nigh."
But we paid no attention. She moved
my hand from her waist to her breast,
and I felt cautiously, my fingers moving
slowly under her shirt but over her bra,
tracing the outline of her breasts and then
cupping one in my hand, squeezing
softly. "You're good at that," she
whispered. Her lips never left mine as
she spoke. We moved together, my body
between her legs.
"This is so fun," she whispered, "but
I'm so sleepy. To be continued?" She
kissed me for another moment, my mouth
straining to stay near hers, and then she
moved from beneath me, placed her head
on my chest, and fell asleep instantly.
We didn't have sex. We never got
naked. I never touched her bare breast,
and her hands never got lower than my
hips. It didn't matter. As she slept, I
whispered, "I love you, Alaska Young."
Just as I was falling asleep, the
Colonel spoke. "Dude, did you just make
out with Alaska?"
"Yeah."
"This is going to end poorly," he
said to himself.
And then I was asleep. That deep,
can-still-taste-her-in-my-mouth sleep,
that sleep that is not particularly restful
but is difficult to wake from all the
same. And then I heard the phone ring. I
think. And I think, although I can't know,
that I felt Alaska get up. I think I heard
her leave. I think. How long she was
gone is impossible to know.
But the Colonel and I both woke up
when she returned, whenever that was,
because she slammed the door. She was
sobbing, like that post-Thanksgiving
morning but worse.
"I have to get out of here!" she cried.
"What's wrong?" I asked.
"I forgot! God, how many times can I
fuck up?" she said. I didn't even have
time to wonder what she forgot before
she screamed, "I JUST HAVE TO GO.
HELP ME GET OUT OF HERE!"
"Where do you need to go?"
She sat down and put her head
between her legs, sobbing. "Just please
distract the Eagle right now so I can go.
Please."
The Colonel and I, at the same
moment, equal in our guilt, said, "Okay."
"Just don't turn on your lights," the
Colonel said. "Just drive slow and don't
turn on your lights. Are you sure you're
okay?"
"Fuck," she said. "Just get rid of the
Eagle for me," she said, her sobs
childlike half screams. "God oh God, I'm
so sorry."
"Okay," the Colonel said. "Start the
car when you hear the second string."
We left.
We did not say: Don't drive. You're
drunk.
We did not say: We aren't letting
you in that car when you are upset.
We did not say: We insist on going
with you.
We did not say: This can wait until
tomorrow. Anything — everything —
can wait.
We walked to our bathroom,
grabbed the three strings of leftover
firecrackers from beneath the sink, and
ran to the Eagle's. We weren't sure that it
would work again.
But it worked well enough. The
Eagle tore out of his house as soon as the
first string of firecrackers started
popping — he was waiting for us, I
suppose — and we headed for the
woods and got him in deeply enough that
he never heard her drive away. The
Colonel and I doubled back, wading
through the creek to save time, slipped in
through the back window of Room 43,
and slept like babies.
After
the day after
The colonel slept the not-restful
sleep of the drunk, and I lay on my back
on the bottom bunk, my mouth tingling
and alive as if still kissing, and we
would have likely slept through our
morning classes had the Eagle not
awoken us at 8:00 with three quick
knocks. I rolled over as he opened the
door, and the morning light rushed into
the room.
"I need y'all to go to the gym," he
said. I squinted toward him, the Eagle
himself backlit into invisibility by the
too bright sun.
"Now," he added, and I knew it. We
were done for. Caught. Too many
progress reports. Too much drinking in
too short a time. Why did they have to
drink last night? And then I could taste
her again, the wine and the cigarette
smoke and the Chap Stick and Alaska,
and I wondered if she had kissed me
because she was drunk. Don't expel me,
I thought. Don't I have just begun to kiss
her.
And as if answering my prayers, the
Eagle said, "You're not in any trouble.
But you need to go to the gym now."
I heard the Colonel rolling over
above me. "What's wrong?"
"Something terrible has happened,"
the Eagle said, and then closed the door.
As he grabbed a pair of jeans lying
on the floor, the Colonel said, "This
happened a couple years ago. When
Hyde's wife died. I guess it's the Old
Man himself now. Poor bastard really
didn't have many breaths left." He
looked up at me, his half-open eyes
bloodshot, and yawned.
"You look a little hungover," I
observed.
He closed his eyes. "Well, then I'm
putting up a good front, Pudge, 'cause I'm
actually a lot hungover."
"I kissed Alaska."
"Yeah. I wasn't that drunk. Let's go."
We walked across the dorm circle to
the gym. I sported baggy jeans, a
sweatshirt with no shirt underneath, and
a bad case of bedhead. All the teachers
were in the dorm circle knocking on
doors, but I didn't see Dr. Hyde. I
imagined him lying dead in his house,
wondered who had found him, how they
even knew he was missing before he
failed to show up for class.
"I don't see Dr. Hyde," I told the
Colonel.
"Poor bastard."
The gym was half full by the time we
arrived. A podium had been set up in the
middle of the basketball court, close to
the bleachers. I sat in the second row,
with the Colonel directly in front of me.
My thoughts were split between sadness
for Dr. Hyde and excitement about
Alaska, remembering the up-close sight
of her mouth whispering, "To be
continued?"
And it did not occur to me — not
even when Dr. Hyde shuffled into the
gym, taking tiny, slow steps toward the
Colonel and me.
I tapped the Colonel on the shoulder
and said, "Hyde's here," and the Colonel
said, "Oh shit," and I said, "What?"
and he said, "Where's Alaska?" and I
said, "No," and he said, "Pudge, is she
here or not?" and then we both stood up
and scanned the faces in the gym.
The Eagle walked up to the podium
and said, "Is everyone here?"
"No," I said to him. "Alaska isn't
here."
The Eagle looked down. "Is
everyone else here?"
"Alaska isn't here!"
"Okay, Miles. Thank you."
"We can't start without Alaska."
The Eagle looked at me. He was
crying, noiselessly. Tears just rolled
from his eyes to his chin and then fell
onto his corduroy pants. He stared at me,
but it was not the Look of Doom. His
eyes blinking the tears down his face, the
Eagle looked, for all the world, sorry.
"Please, sir," I said. "Can we please
wait for Alaska?" I felt all of them
staring at us, trying to understand what I
now knew, but didn't quite believe.
The Eagle looked down and bit his
lower lip. "Last night, Alaska Young
was in a terrible accident." His tears
came faster, then. "And she was killed.
Alaska has passed away."
For a moment, everyone in the gym
was silent, and the place had never been
so quiet, not even in the moments before
the Colonel ridiculed opponents at the
free-throw stripe. I stared down at the
back of the Colonel's head. I just stared,
looking at his thick and bushy hair. For a
moment, it was so quiet that you could
hear the sound of not-breathing, the
vacuum created by 190 students shocked
out of air.
I thought: It's all my fault I thought: I
don't feel very good.
I thought: I'm going to throw up.
I stood up and ran outside. I made it
to a trash can outside the gym, five feet
from the double doors, and heaved
toward Gatorade bottles and half-eaten
McDonald's. But nothing much came out.
I just heaved, my stomach muscles
tightening and my throat opening and a
gasping, guttural blech, going through the
motions of vomiting over and over
again. In between gags and coughs, I
sucked air in hard. Her mouth. Her dead,
cold mouth. To not be continued. I knew
she was drunk. Upset. Obviously you
don't let someone drive drunk and pissed
off.
Obviously. And Christ, Miles, what
the hell is wrong with you? And then
comes the puke, finally, splashing onto
the trash. And here is whatever of her I
had left in my mouth, here in this trash
can. And then it comes again, more —
and then okay, calm down, okay,
seriously, she's not dead.
She's not dead. She's alive. She's
alive somewhere. She's in the woods.
Alaska is hiding in the woods and she's
not dead, she's just hiding. She's just
playing a trick on us. This is just an
Alaska Young Prank Extraordinaire. It's
Alaska being Alaska, funny and playful
and not knowing when or how to put on
the brakes.
And then I felt much better, because
she had not died at all.
I walked back into the gym, and
everyone seemed to be in various stages
of disintegration. It was like something
you see on TV, like a National
Geographic special on funeral rituals. I
saw Takumi standing over Lara, his
hands on her shoulders. I saw Kevin
with his crew cut, his head buried
between his knees. A girl named Molly
Tan, who'd studied with us for precalc,
wailed, beating balled fists against her
thighs. All these people I sort of knew
and sort of didn't, and all of them
disintegrating, and then I saw the
Colonel, his knees tucked into his chest,
lying on his side on the bleachers,
Madame O'Malley sitting next to him,
reaching toward his shoulder but not
actually touching it. The Colonel was
screaming. He would inhale, and then
scream. Inhale. Scream. Inhale. Scream.
I thought, at first, that it was only
yelling. But after a few breaths, I noticed
a rhythm. And after a few more, I
realized that the Colonel was saying
words. He was screaming, "I'm so
sorry."
Madame O'Malley grabbed his hand.
"You've got nothing to be sorry for,
Chip. There was nothing you could have
done." But if only she knew.
And I just stood there, looking at the
scene, thinking about her not dead, and I
felt a hand on my shoulder and turned
around to see the Eagle, and I said, "I
think she's playing a dumb prank," and
he said, "No, Miles, no, I'm sorry," and I
felt the heat in my cheeks and said,
"She's really good. She could pull this
off," and he said, "I saw her. I'm sorry."
"What happened?"
"Somebody was setting off
firecrackers in the woods," he said, and
I closed my eyes tight, the ineluctable
fact of the matter at hand: I had killed
her. "I went out after them, and I guess
she drove off campus. It was late. She
was on I-65 just south of downtown. A
truck had jackknifed, blocking both
lanes. A police car had just gotten to the
scene. She hit the cruiser without ever
swerving. I believe she must have been
very intoxicated. The police said they
smelled alcohol."
"How do you know?" I asked.
"I saw her, Miles. I talked to the
police. It was instant. The steering
wheel hit her chest. I'm so sorry."
And I said, you saw her and he said
yes and I said how did she look and he
said, just a bit of blood coming out of
her nose, and I sat down on the floor of
the gym. I could hear the Colonel still
screaming, and I could feel hands on my
back as I hunched forward, but I could
only see her lying naked on a metal
table, a small trickle of blood falling out
of her half-teardrop nose, her green eyes
open, staring off into the distance, her
mouth turned up just enough to suggest
the idea of a smile, and she had felt so
warm against me, her mouth soft and
warm on mine.
The Colonel and I are walking back
to our dorm room in silence. I am staring
at the ground beneath me. I cannot stop
thinking that she is dead, and I cannot
stop thinking that she cannot possibly be
dead. People do not just die.
I can't catch my breath. I feel afraid,
like someone has told me they're going
to kick my ass after school and now it's
sixth period and I know full well what's
coming. It is so cold today — literally
freezing — and I imagine running to the
creek and diving in headfirst, the creek
so shallow that my hands scrape against
the rocks, and my body slides into the
cold water, the shock of the cold giving
way to numbness, and I would stay there,
float down with that water first to the
Cahaba River, then to the Alabama
River, then to Mobile Bay and the Gulf
of Mexico.
I want to melt into the brown,
crunchy grass that the Colonel and I step
on as we silently make our way back to
our room. His feet are so large, too large
for his short body, and the new generic
tennis shoes he wears since his old ones
were pissed in look almost like clown
shoes. I think of Alaska's flip-flops
clinging to her blue toes as we swung on
the swing down by the lake. Will the
casket be open? Can a mortician recreate
her smile? I could still hear her
saying it: "This is so fun, but I'm so
sleepy. To be continued?"
Nineteenth-century preacher Henry
Ward Beecher's last words were "Now
comes the mystery." The poet Dylan
Thomas, who liked a good drink at least
as much as Alaska, said, "I've had
eighteen straight whiskeys. I do believe
that's a record," before dying. Alaska's
favorite was playwright Eugene O'Neill:
"Born in a hotel room, and — God
damnit— died in a hotel room." Even
car-accident victims sometimes have
time for last words. Princess Diana said,
"Oh God. What's happened?" Movie star
James Dean said, "They've got to see
us," just before slamming his Porsche
into another car. I know so many last
words. But I will never know hers.
I am several steps in front of him
before I realize that the Colonel has
fallen down. I turn around, and he is
lying on his face. "We have to get up,
Chip. We have to get up. We just have to
get to the room."
The Colonel turns his face from the
ground to me and looks me dead in the
eye and says, "I. Can't. Breathe."
But he can breathe, and I know this
because he is hyperventilating, breathing
as if trying to blow air back into the
dead. I pick him up, and he grabs onto
me and starts sobbing, again saying, "I'm
so sorry," over and over again.
We have never hugged before, me
and the Colonel, and there is nothing
much to say, because he ought to be
sorry, and I just put my hand on the back
of his head and say the only true thing.
"I'm sorry, too."
two days after
I didn't sleep that night. Dawn was
slow in coming, and even when it did,
the sun shining bright through the blinds,
the rickety radiator couldn't keep us
warm, so the Colonel and I sat
wordlessly on the couch. He read the
almanac.
The night before, I'd braved the cold
to call my parents, and this time when I
said, "Hey, it's Miles," and my mom
answered with, "What's wrong? Is
everything okay?" I could safely tell her
no, everything was not okay. My dad
picked up the line then.
"What's wrong?" he asked.
"Don't yell," my mother said.
"I'm not yelling; it's just the phone."
"Well, talk quieter," she said, and so
it took some time before I could say
anything, and then once I could, it took
some time to say the words in order —
my friend Alaska died in a car crash. I
stared at the numbers and messages
scrawled on the wall by the phone.
"Oh, Miles," Mom said. "I'm so
sorry, Miles. Do you want to come
home?"
"No," I said. "I want to be here…I
can't believe it," which was still partly
true.
"That's just awful," my dad said.
"Her poor parents." Poor parent, I
thought, and wondered about her dad. I
couldn't even imagine what my parents
would do if I died. Driving drunk. God,
if her father ever found out, he would
disembowel the Colonel and me.
"What can we do for you right now?"
my mom asked.
"I just needed you to pick up. I just
needed you to answer the phone, and you
did." I heard a sniffle behind me — from
cold or grief, I didn't know — and told
my parents, "Someone's waiting for the
phone. I gotta go."
All night, I felt paralyzed into
silence, terrorized. What was I so afraid
of, anyway? The thing had happened.
She was dead. She was warm and soft
against my skin, my tongue in her mouth,
and she was laughing, trying to teach me,
make me better, promising to be
continued. And now.
And now she was colder by the hour,
more dead with every breath I took. I
thought: That is the fear: I have lost
something important, and I cannot find
it, and I need it It is fear like if
someone lost his glasses and went to
the glasses store and they told him that
the world had run out of glasses and he
would just have to do without Just
before eight in the morning, the Colonel
announced to no one in particular, "I
think there are bufriedos at lunch today."
"Yeah," I said. "Are you hungry?"
"God no. But she named them, you
know. They were called fried burritos
when we got here, and Alaska started
calling them bufriedos, and then
everyone did, and then finally Maureen
officially changed the name." He paused.
"I don't know what to do, Miles."
"Yeah. I know."
"I finished memorizing the capitals,"
he said.
"Of the states?"
"No. That was fifth grade. Of the
countries. Name a country."
"Canada," I said.
"Something hard."
"Urn. Uzbekistan?"
"Tashkent." He didn't even take a
moment to think. It was just there, at the
tip of his tongue, as if he'd been waiting
for me to say "Uzbekistan" all along.
"Let's smoke."
We walked to the bathroom and
turned on the shower, and the Colonel
pulled a pack of matches from his jeans
and struck a match against the
matchbook. It didn't light. Again, he tried
and failed, and again, smacking at the
matchbook with a crescendoing fury
until he finally threw the matches to the
ground and screamed, "GODDAMN IT!"
"It's okay," I said, reaching into my
pocket for a lighter.
"No, Pudge, it's not," he said,
throwing down his cigarette and standing
up, suddenly pissed. "Goddamn it! God,
how did this happen? How could she be
so stupid! She just never thought
anything through. So goddamned
impulsive. Christ. It is not okay. I can't
believe she was so stupid!"
"We should have stopped her," I
said.
He reached into the stall to turn off
the dribbling shower and then pounded
an open palm against the tile wall.
"Yeah, I know we should have
stopped her, damn it. I am shit sure
keenly aware that we should have
stopped her.
But we shouldn't have had to. You
had to watch her like a three-year-old.
You do one thing wrong, and then she
just dies. Christ! I'm losing it. I'm going
on a walk."
"Okay," I answered, trying to keep
my voice calm.
"I'm sorry," he said. "I feel so
screwed up. I feel like I might die."
"You might," I said.
"Yeah. Yeah. I might. You never
know. It's just. It's like. POOF. And
you're gone."
I followed him into the room. He
grabbed the almanac from his bunk,
zipped his jacket, closed the door, and
POOF. He was gone.
With morning came visitors. An hour
after the Colonel left, resident stoner
Hank Walsten dropped by to offer me
some weed, which I graciously turned
down. Hank hugged me and said, "At
least it was instant. At least there wasn't
any pain."
I knew he was only trying to help,
but he didn't get it. There was pain. A
dull endless pain in my gut that wouldn't
go away even when I knelt on the
stingingly frozen tile of the bathroom,
dry-heaving.
And what is an "instant" death
anyway? How long is an instant? Is it
one second? Ten? The pain of those
seconds must have been awful as her
heart burst and her lungs collapsed and
there was no air and no blood to her
brain and only raw panic. What the hell
i s instant? Nothing is instant. Instant
rice takes five minutes, instant pudding
an hour. I doubt that an instant of
blinding pain feels particularly
instantaneous.
Was there time for her life to flash
before her eyes? Was I there? Was Jake?
And she promised, I remembered, she
promised to be continued, but I knew,
too, that she was driving north when she
died, north toward Nashville, toward
Jake. Maybe it hadn't meant anything to
her, had been nothing more than another
grand impulsivity. And as Hank stood in
the doorway, I just looked past him,
looking across the too-quiet dorm circle,
wondering if it had mattered to her, and I
can only tell myself that of course, yes,
she had promised. To be continued.
Lara came next, her eyes heavy with
swelling. "What happeened?" she asked
me as I held her, standing on my tiptoes
so I could place my chin on top of her
head.
"I don't know," I said.
"Deed you see her that night?" she
asked, speaking into my collarbone.
"She got drunk," I told her. "The
Colonel and I went to sleep, and I guess
she drove off campus." And that became
the standard lie.
I felt Lara's fingers, wet with her
tears, press against my palm, and before
I could think better of it, I pulled my
hand away. "I'm sorry," I said.
"Eet's okay," she said. "I'll be een
my room eef you want to come by." I did
not drop by. I didn't know what to say to
her — I was caught in a love triangle
with one dead side.
That afternoon, we all filed into the
gym again for a town meeting. The Eagle
announced that the school would charter
a bus on Sunday to the funeral in Vine
Station. As we got up to leave, I noticed
Takumi and Lara walking toward me.
Lara caught my eye and smiled wanly. I
smiled back, but quickly turned and hid
myself amid the mass of mourners filing
out of the gym.
I am sleeping, and Alaska flies into
the room. She is naked, and intact. Her
breasts, which I felt only very briefly
and in the dark, are luminously full as
they hang down from her body. She
hovers inches above me, her breath
warm and sweet against my face like a
breeze passing through tall grass.
"Hi," I say. "I've missed you."
"You look good, Pudge."
"So do you."
"I'm so naked," she says, and laughs.
"How did I get so naked?"
"I just want you to stay," I say.
"No," she says, and her weight falls
dead on me, crushing my chest, stealing
away my breath, and she is cold and
wet, like melting ice. Her head is split in
half and a pink-gray sludge oozes from
the fracture in her skull and drips down
onto my face, and she stinks of
formaldehyde and rotting meat. I gag and
push her off me, terrified.
I woke up falling, and landed with a
thud on the floor. Thank God I'm a
bottom-bunk man. I had slept for
fourteen hours. It was morning.
Wednesday, I thought. Her funeral
Sunday. I wondered if the Colonel
would get back by then, where he was.
H e had to come back for the funeral,
because I could not go alone, and going
with anyone other than the Colonel
would amount to alone.
The cold wind buffeted against the
door, and the trees outside the back
window shook with such force that I
could hear it from our room, and I sat in
my bed and thought of the Colonel out
there somewhere, his head down, his
teeth clenched, walking into the wind.
four days after
It was five in the morning and I was
reading a biography of the explorer
Meriwether Lewis (of & Clark fame)
and trying to stay awake when the door
opened and the Colonel walked in.
His pale hands shook, and the
almanac he held looked like a puppet
dancing without strings.
"Are you cold?" I asked.
He nodded, slipped off his sneakers,
and climbed into my bed on the bottom
bunk, pulling up the covers. His teeth
chattered like Morse code.
"Jesus. Are you all right?"
"Better now. Warmer," he said. A
small, ghost white hand appeared from
beneath the comforter. "Hold my hand,
will ya?"
"All right, but that's it. No kissing."
The quilt shook with his laughter.
"Where have you been?"
"I walked to Montevallo."
"Forty miles?!"
"Forty-two," he corrected me. "Well.
Forty-two there. Forty-two back. Eightytwo
miles. No. Eighty-four. Yes. Eightyfour
miles in forty-five hours."
"What the hell's in Montevallo?" I
asked.
"Not much. I just walked till I got too
cold, and then I turned around."
"You didn't sleep?"
"No! The dreams are terrible. In my
dreams, she doesn't even look like
herself anymore. I don't even remember
what she lookedlike."
I let go of his hand, grabbed last
year's yearbook, and found her picture.
In the black-and-white photograph, she's
wearing her orange tank top and cutoff
jeans that stretch halfway down her
skinny thighs, her mouth open wide in a
frozen laugh as her left arm holds
Takumi in a headlock. Her hair falls
over her face just enough to obscure her
cheeks.
"Right," the Colonel said. "Yeah. I
was so tired of her getting upset for no
reason. The way she would get sulky and
make references to the freaking
oppressive weight of tragedy or
whatever but then never said what was
wrong, never have any goddamned
reason to be sad. And I just think you
ought to have a reason. My girlfriend
dumped me, so I'm sad. I got caught
smoking, so I'm pissed off. My head
hurts, so I'm cranky. She never had a
reason, Pudge. I was just so tired of
putting up with her drama. And I just let
her go. Christ."
Her moodiness had annoyed me, too,
sometimes, but not that night. That night I
let her go because she told me to. It was
that simple for me, and that stupid.
The Colonel's hand was so little, and
I grabbed it tight, his cold seeping into
me and my warmth into him. "I
memorized the populations," he said.
"Uzbekistan."
"Twenty-four million seven hundred
fifty-five thousand five hundred and
nineteen."
"Cameroon," I said, but it was too
late. He was asleep, his hand limp in
mine. I placed it back under the quilt and
climbed up into his bed, a top-bunk man
for this night at least. I fell asleep
listening to his slow, even breaths, his
stubbornness finally melting away in the
face of insurmountable fatigue.
six days after
That Sunday,Igot up after three hours
of sleep and showered for the first time
in a long while. I put on my only suit. I
almost hadn't brought it, but my mom
insisted that you never know when
you're going to need a suit, and sure
enough.
The Colonel did not own a suit, and
by virtue of his stature could not borrow
one from anyone at the Creek, so he
wore black slacks and a gray buttondown.
"I don't suppose I can wear the
flamingo tie," he said as he pulled on
black socks.
"It's a bit festive, given the
occasion," I responded.
"Can't wear it to the opera," said the
Colonel, almost smiling.
"Can't wear it to a funeral. Can't use
it to hang myself. It's a bit useless, as
ties go." I gave him a tie.
The school had chartered buses to
ferry students north to Alaska's
hometown of Vine Station, but Lara, the
Colonel, Takumi, and I drove in
Takumi's SUV, taking the back roads so
we didn't have to drive past the spot on
the highway. I stared out the window,
watching as the suburban sprawl
surrounding Birmingham faded into the
slow-sloping hills and fields of northern
Alabama.
Up front, Takumi told Lara about the
time Alaska got her boob honked over
the summer, and Lara laughed. That was
the first time I had seen her, and now we
were coming to the last. More than
anything, I felt the unfairness of it, the
inarguable injustice of loving someone
who might have loved you back but can't
due to deadness, and then I leaned
forward, my forehead against the back of
Takumi's headrest, and I cried,
whimpering, and I didn't even feel
sadness so much as pain. It hurt, and that
is not a euphemism. It hurt like a beating.
Meriwether Lewis's last words
were, "I am not a coward, but I am so
strong. So hard to die." I don't doubt that
it is, but it cannot be much harder than
being left behind. I thought of Lewis as I
followed Lara into the A-frame chapel
attached to the single-story funeral home
in Vine Station, Alabama, a town every
bit as depressed and depressing as
Alaska had always made it out to be.
The place smelled of mildew and
disinfectant, and the yellow wallpaper in
the foyer was peeling at the corners.
"Are y'all here for Ms. Young?" a
guy asked the Colonel, and the Colonel
nodded. We were led to a large room
with rows of folding chairs populated by
only one man. He knelt before a coffin at
the front of the chapel. The coffin was
closed. Closed. Never going to see her
again. Can't kiss her forehead. Can't see
her one last time. But I needed to, I
needed to see her, and much too loud, I
asked, "Why is it closed?" and the man,
whose potbelly pushed out from his tootight
suit, turned around and walked
toward me.
"Her mother," he said. "Her mother
had an open casket, and Alaska told me,
'Don't ever let them see me dead,
Daddy,' and so that's that. Anyway, son,
she's not in there. She's with the Lord."
And he put his hands on my
shoulders, this man who had grown fat
since he'd last had to wear a suit, and I
couldn't believe what I had done to him,
his eyes glittering green like Alaska's but
sunk deep into dark sockets, like a
green-eyed, still-breathing ghost, and
don't no don't don't die, Alaska. Don't
die. And I walked out of his embrace
and past Lara and Takumi to her casket
and knelt before it and placed my hands
on the finished wood, the dark
mahogany, the color of her hair. I felt the
Colonel's small hands on my shoulders,
and a tear dripped onto my head, and for
a few moments, it was just the three of
us — the buses of students hadn't
arrived, and Takumi and Lara had faded
away, and it was just the three of us —
three bodies and two people — the three
who knew what had happened and too
many layers between all of us, too much
keeping us from one another. The
Colonel said, "I just want to save her so
bad," and I said, "Chip, she's gone," and
he said, "I thought I'd feel her looking
down on us, but you're right. She's just
gone," and I said, "Oh God, Alaska, I
love you. I love you," and the Colonel
whispered, "I'm so sorry, Pudge. I know
you did," and I said, "No. Not past
tense." She wasn't even a person
anymore, just flesh rotting, but I loved
her present tense. The Colonel knelt
down beside me and put his lips to the
coffin and whispered, "I am sorry,
Alaska. You deserved a better friend."
Is it so hard to die, Mr. Lewis? Is
that labyrinth really worse than this one?
seven days after
I spent the next day in our room,
playing football on mute, at once unable
to do nothing and unable to do anything
much. It was Martin Luther King Day,
our last day before classes started again,
and I could think of nothing but having
killed her. The Colonel spent the
morning with me, but then he decided to
go to the cafeteria for meat loaf.
"Let's go," he said.
"Not hungry."
"You have to eat."
"Wanna bet?" I asked without
looking up from the game.
"Christ. Fine." He sighed and left,
slamming the door behind him. He's still
very angry, I found myself thinking with
a bit of pity. No reason to be angry.
Anger just distracts from the allencompassing
sadness, the frank
knowledge that you killed her and
robbed her of a future and a life. Getting
pissed wouldn't fix it. Damn it.
"How's the meat loaf?" I asked the
Colonel when he returned.
"About as you remember it. Neither
meaty nor loafy."The Colonel sat down
next to me. "The Eagle ate with me.
He wanted to know if we set off the
fireworks." I paused the game and turned
to him. With one hand, he picked at one
of the last remaining pieces of blue vinyl
on our foam couch.
"And you said?" I asked.
"I didn't rat. Anyway, he said her
aunt or something is coming tomorrow to
clean out her room. So if there's anything
that's ours, or anything her aunt wouldn't
want to find…"
I turned back to the game and said,
"I'm not up for it today."
"Then I'll do it alone," he answered.
He turned and walked outside, leaving
the door open, and the bitter remnants of
the cold snap quickly overwhelmed the
radiator, so I paused the game and stood
up to close the door, and when I peeked
around the corner to see if the Colonel
had entered her room, he was standing
there, just outside our door, and he
grabbed onto my sweatshirt, smiled, and
said, "I knew you wouldn't make me do
that alone. I knew it." I shook my head
and rolled my eyes but followed him
down the sidewalk, past the pay phone,
and into her room.
I hadn't thought of her smell since
she died. But when the Colonel opened
the door, I caught the edge of her scent:
wet dirt and grass and cigarette smoke,
and beneath that the vestiges of vanillascented
skin lotion. She flooded into my
present, and only tact kept me from
burying my face in the dirty laundry
overfilling the hamper by her dresser. It
looked as I remembered it: hundreds of
books stacked against the walls, her
lavender comforter crumpled at the foot
of her bed, a precarious stack of books
on her bedside table, her volcanic
candle just peaking out from beneath the
bed. It looked as I knew it would, but the
smell, unmistakably her, shocked me. I
stood in the center of the room, my eyes
shut, inhaling slowly through my nose,
the vanilla and the uncut autumn grass,
but with each slow breath, the smell
faded as I became accustomed to it, and
soon she was gone again.
"This is unbearable," I said matterof-
factly, because it was.
"God. These books she'll never read.
Her Life's Library."
"Bought at garage sales and now
probably destined for another one."
"Ashes to ashes. Garage sale to
garage sale," I said.
"Right. Okay, down to business. Get
anything her aunt wouldn't want to find,"
the Colonel said, and I saw him kneeling
at her desk, the drawer beneath her
computer pulled open, his small fingers
pulling out groups of stapled papers.
"Christ, she kept every paper she ever
wrote. Moby-Dick. Ethan Frome."
I reached between her mattress and
box spring for the condoms I knew she
hid for Jake's visits. I pocketed them,
and then went over to her dresser,
searching through her underwear for
hidden bottles of liquor or sex toys or
God knows what. I found nothing. And
then I settled on the books, staring at
them stacked on their sides, spines out,
the haphazard collection of literature that
was Alaska. There was one book I
wanted to take with me, but I couldn't
find it.
The Colonel was sitting on the floor
next to her bed, his head bent toward the
floor, looking under her bed frame.
"She sure didn't leave any booze, did
she?" he asked.
And I almost said, She buried it in
the woods out by the soccer field, but I
realized that the Colonel didn't know,
that she never took him to the edge of the
woods and told him to dig for buried
treasure, that she and I had shared that
alone, and I kept it for myself like a
keepsake, as if sharing the memory might
lead to its dissipation.
"Do you see The General in His
Labyrinth anywhere?" I asked while
scanning the titles on the book spines. "It
has a lot of green on the cover, I think.
It's a paperback, and it got flooded, so
the pages are probably bloated, but I
don't think she—" and then he cut me off
with, "Yeah, it's right here," and I turned
around and he was holding it, the pages
fanned out like an accordion from
Longwell, Jeff, and Kevin's prank, and I
walked over to him and took it and sat
down on her bed. The places she'd
underlined and the little notes she'd
written had all been blurred out by the
soaking, but the book was still mostly
readable, and I was thinking I would
take it back to my room and try to read it
even though it wasn't a biography when I
flipped to that page, toward the back: He
was shaken by the overwhelming
revelation that the headlong race
between his misfortunes and his dreams
was at that moment reaching the finish
line. The rest was darkness. "Damn it,"
he sighed. "How will I ever get out of
this labyrinth!"
The whole passage was underlined
in bleeding, water-soaked black ink. But
there was another ink, this one a crisp
blue, post-flood, and an arrow led from
"How will I ever get out of this
labyrinth!" to a margin note written in
her loop-heavy cursive: Straight &
Fast.
"Hey, she wrote something in here
after the flood," I said. "But it's weird.
Look. Page one ninety-two." I tossed the
book to the Colonel, and he flipped to
the page and then looked up at me.
"Straight and fast," he said.
"Yeah. Weird, huh? The way out of
the labyrinth, I guess."
"Wait, how did it happen? What
happened?"
And because there was only one it, I
knew to what he was referring. "I told
you what the Eagle told me. A truck
jackknifed on the road. A cop car
showed up to stop traffic, and she ran
into the cop car. She was so drunk she
didn't even swerve."
"So drunk? So drunk? The cop car
would have had its lights on. Pudge, she
ran into a cop car that had its lights on,"
he said hurriedly. "Straight and fast.
Straight and fast. Out of the labyrinth."
"No," I said, but even as I said it, I
could see it. I could see her drunk
enough and pissed off enough. (About
what — about cheating on Jake? About
hurting me? About wanting me and not
him? Still pissed about ratting out
Marya?) I could see her staring down the
cop car and aiming for it and not giving
a shit about anyone else, not thinking of
her promise to me, not thinking of her
father or anyone, and that bitch, that
bitch, she killed herself.
But no. No. That was not her. No.
She said To be continued. Of course.
"No."
"Yeah, you're probably right," the
Colonel said. He dropped the book, sat
down on the bed next to me, and put his
forehead in his hands. "Who drives six
miles off campus to kill herself? Doesn't
make any sense. But 'straight and fast.'
Bit of an odd premonition, isn't it? And
we still don't really know what
happened, if you think about it.
Where she was going, why. Who
called. Someone called, right, or did I
make—" And the Colonel kept talking,
puzzling it out, while I picked up the
book and found my way to that page
where the general's headlong race came
to its end, and we were both stuck in our
heads, the distance between us
unbridgeable, and I could not listen to
the Colonel, because I was busy trying to
get the last hints of her smell, busy
telling myself that of course she had not
done it. It was me — I had done it, and
so had the Colonel. He could try to
puzzle his way out of it, but I knew
better, knew that we could never be
anything but wholly, unforgivably guilty.
eight days after
Tuesday — we had schoolfor the
first time. Madame O'Malley had a
moment of silence at the beginning of
French class, a class that was always
punctuated with long moments of
silence, and then asked us how we were
feeling.
"Awful," a girl said.
"En francais,"Madame O'Malley
replied. "En francais."
Everything looked the same, but
more still: the Weekday Warriors still
sat on the benches outside the library,
but their gossip was quiet, understated.
The cafeteria clamored with the sounds
of plastic trays against wooden tables
and forks scraping plates, but any
conversations were muted. But more
than the noiselessness of everyone else
was the silence where she should have
been, the bubbling bursting storytelling
Alaska, but instead it felt like those
times when she had withdrawn into
herself, like she was refusing to answer
how or why questions, only this time for
good.
The Colonel sat down next to me in
religion class, sighed, and said, "You
reek of smoke, Pudge."
"Ask me if I give a shit."
Dr. Hyde shuffled into class then,
our final exams stacked underneath one
arm. He sat down, took a series of
labored breaths, and began to talk. "It is
a law that parents should not have to
bury their children," he said. "And
someone should enforce it. This
semester, we're going to continue
studying the religious traditions to which
you were introduced this fall. But there's
no doubting that the questions we'll be
asking have more immediacy now than
they did just a few days ago. What
happens to us after we die, for instance,
is no longer a question of idle
philosophical interest. It is a question
we must ask about our classmate. And
how to live in the shadow of grief is not
something nameless Buddhists,
Christians, and Muslims have to explore.
The questions of religious thought have
become, I suspect, personal."
He shuffled through our exams,
pulling one out from the pile before him.
"I have here Alaska's final. You'll recall
that you were asked what the most
important question facing people is, and
how the three traditions we're studying
this year address that question. This was
Alaska's question."
With a sigh, he grabbed hold of his
chair and lifted himself out of it, then
wrote on the blackboard: How will we
ever get out of this labyrinth of
suffering?—A. Y.
"I'm going to leave that up for the
rest of the semester," he said.
"Because everybody who has ever
lost their way in life has felt the nagging
insistence of that question. At some point
we all look up and realize we are lost in
a maze, and I don't want us to forget
Alaska, and I don't want to forget that
even when the material we study seems
boring, we're trying to understand how
people have answered that question and
the questions each of you posed in your
papers — how different traditions have
come to terms with what Chip, in his
final, called 'people's rotten lots in life.'"
Hyde sat down. "So, how are you guys
doing?"
The Colonel and I said nothing,
while a bunch of people who didn't
know Alaska extolled her virtues and
professed to be devastated, and at first,
it bothered me. I didn't want the people
she didn't know — and the people she
didn't like — to be sad. They'd never
cared about her, and now they were
carrying on as if she were a sister. But I
guess I didn't know her completely,
either. If I had, I'd have known what
she'd meant by "To be continued?" And
if I had cared about her as I should have,
as I thought I did, how could I have let
her go?
So they didn't bother me, really. But
next to me, the Colonel breathed slowly
and deeply through his nose like a bull
about to charge.
He actually rolled his eyes when
Weekday Warrior Brooke Blakely,
whose parents had received a progress
report courtesy of Alaska, said, "I'm just
sad I never told her I loved her. I just
don't understand why."
"That's such bullshit," the Colonel
said as we walked to lunch. "As if
Brooke Blakely gives two shits about
Alaska."
"If Brooke Blakely died, wouldn't
you be sad?" I asked.
"I guess, but I wouldn't bemoan the
fact I never told her I loved her. I don't
love her. She's an idiot."
I thought everyone else had a better
excuse to grieve than we did — after all,
they hadn't killed her — but I knew
better than to try to talk to the Colonel
when he was mad.
nine days after
"I've got a theory,"the Colonel said
as I walked in the door after a miserable
day of classes. The cold had begun to let
up, but word had not spread to whoever
ran the furnaces, so the classrooms were
all stuffy and overheated, and I just
wanted to crawl into bed and sleep until
the time came to do it all over again.
"Missed you in class today," I noted
as I sat down on my bed. The Colonel
sat at his desk, hunched over a notebook.
I lay down on my back and pulled the
covers up over my head, but the Colonel
was undiscouraged.
"Right, well, I was busy coming up
with the theory, which isn't terribly
likely, admittedly, but it's plausible. So,
listen. She kisses you. That night,
someone calls. Jake, I imagine. They
have a fight — about cheating or about
something else — who knows. So she's
upset, and she wants to go see him. She
comes back to the room crying, and she
tells us to help her get off campus. And
she's freaked out, because, I don't know,
let's say because if she can't go visit him,
Jake will break up with her. That's just a
hypothetical reason. So she gets off
campus, drunk and all pissed off, and
she's furious at herself over whatever it
is, and she's driving along and sees the
cop car and then in a flash everything
comes together and the end to her
labyrinthine mystery is staring her right
in the face and she just does it, straight
and fast, just aims at the cop car and
never swerves, not because she's drunk
but because she killed herself."
"That's ridiculous. She wasn't
thinking about Jake or fighting with Jake.
She was making out with me. I tried to
bring up the whole Jake thing, but she
just shushed me."
"So who called her?"
I kicked off my comforter and, my
fist balled, smashed my hand against the
wall with each syllable as I said, "I!
DON'T! KNOW! And you know
what, it doesn't matter. She's dead. Is the
brilliant Colonel going to figure out
something that's gonna make her less
freaking dead?" But it did matter, of
course, which is why I kept pounding at
our cinder-block walls and why the
questions had floated beneath the surface
for a week. Who'd called? What was
wrong? Why did she leave? Jake had not
gone to her funeral. Nor had he called us
to say he was sorry, or to ask us what
happened. He had just disappeared, and
of course, I had wondered. I had
wondered if she had any intention of
keeping her promise that we would be
continued. I had wondered who called,
and why, and what made her so upset.
But I'd rather wonder than get answers I
couldn't live with.
"Maybe she was driving there to
break up with Jake, then," the Colonel
said, his voice suddenly edgeless. He sat
down on the cornerof my bed.
"I don't know. I don't really want to
know."
"Yeah, well," he said. "I want to
know. Because if she knew what she
was doing, Pudge, she made us
accomplices.
And I hate her for that. I mean, God,
look at us. We can't even talk to anyone
anymore. So listen, I wrote out a game
plan: One. Talk to eyewitnesses. Two.
Figure out how drunk she was. Three.
Figure out where she was going, and
why."
"I don't want to talk to Jake," I said
halfheartedly, already resigned to the
Colonel's incessant planning. "If he
knows, I definitely don't want to talk to
him. And if he doesn't, I don't want to
pretend like it didn't happen."
The Colonel stood up and sighed.
"You know what, Pudge? I feel bad for
you. I do. I know you kissed her, and I
know you're broken up about it. But
honestly, shut up. If Jake knows, you're
not gonna make it any worse. And if he
doesn't, he won't find out. So just stop
worrying about your goddamned self for
one minute and think about your dead
friend. Sorry. Long day."
"It's fine," I said, pulling the covers
back over my head. "It's fine," I
repeated. And, whatever. It was fine. It
had to be. I couldn't afford to lose the
Colonel.
thirteen days after
Because our main source of
vehicular transportation was interred in
Vine Station, Alabama, the Colonel and I
were forced to walk to the Pelham
Police Department to search for
eyewitnesses. We left after eating dinner
in the cafeteria, the night falling fast and
early, and trudged up Highway 119 for a
mile and a half before coming to a
single-story stucco building situated
between a Waffle House and a gas
station.
Inside, a long desk that rose to the
Colonel's solar plexus separated us from
the police station proper, which seemed
to consist of three uniformed officers
sitting at three desks, all of them talking
on the phone.
"I'm Alaska Young's brother," the
Colonel announced brazenly.
"And I want to talk to the cop who
saw her die."
A pale, thin man with a reddish
blond beard spoke quickly into the
phone and then hung up. "I seen 'er," he
said.
"She hit mah cruiser."
"Can we talk to you outside?" the
Colonel asked.
"Yup."
The cop grabbed a coat and walked
toward us, and as he approached, I could
see the blue veins through the translucent
skin of his face. For a cop, he didn't
seem to get out much. Once outside, the
Colonel lit a cigarette.
"You nineteen?" the cop asked. In
Alabama, you can get married at
eighteen (fourteen with Mom and Dad's
permission), but you have to be nineteen
to smoke.
"So fine me. I just need to know
what you saw."
"Ah most always work from six t'
midnight, but I was coverin' the
graveyard shift. We got a call 'bout a
jackknifed truck, and I's only about a
mile away, so I headed over, and I'd just
pulled up. I's still in mah cruiser, and I
seen out the corner a' my eye the
headlights, and my lights was on and I
turned the siren on, but the lights just
kept comin' straight at me, son, and I got
out quick and run off and she just
barreled inta me. I seen plenty, but I ain't
never seen that. She didn't tarn. She
didn't brake. She jest hit it. I wa'n't more
than ten feet from the cruiser when she
hit it. I thought I'd die, but here ah am."
For the first time, the Colonel's
theory seemed plausible. She didn't hear
the siren? She didn't see the lights? She
was sober enough to kiss well, I thought.
Surely she was sober enough to swerve.
"Did you see her face before she hit
the car? Was she asleep?" the Colonel
asked.
"That I cain't tell ya. I didn't see 'er.
There wa'n't much time."
"I understand. She was dead when
you got to the car?" he asked.
"I–I did everything I could. Ah run
right up to her, but the steerin' wheel —
well, ah reached in there, thought if ah
could git that steerin' wheel loose, but
there weren't no gettin' her outta that car
alive. It fairly well crushed her chest,
see."
I winced at the image. "Did she say
anything?" I asked.
"She was passed on, son," he said,
shaking his head, and my last hope of
last words faded.
"Do you think it was an accident?"
the Colonel asked as I stood beside him,
my shoulders slouching, wanting a
cigarette but nervous to be as audacious
as him.
"Ah been an officer here twenty-six
years, and ah've seen more drunks than
you'n count, and ah ain't never seen
someone so drunk they cain't swerve.
But ah don't know. The coroner said it
was an accident, and maybe it was.
That ain't my field, y'know. I s'pose
that's 'tween her and the Lord now."
"How drunk was she?" I asked.
"Like, did they test her?"
"Yeah. Her BAL was point twentyfour.
That's drunk, certainly. That's a
powerful drunk."
"Was there anything in the car?" the
Colonel asked. "Anything, like, unusual
that you remember?"
"I remember them brochures from
colleges — places in Maine and Ohia
and Texas — I thought t' myself that girl
must be from Culver Crick and that was
mighty sad, see a girl like that lookin't'
go t' college. That's a goddamned shame.
And they's flowers. They was flowers in
her backseat. Like, from a florist.
Tulips."
Tulips? I thought immediately of the
tulips Jake had sent her. "Were they
white?" I asked.
"They sure was," the cop answered.
Why would she have taken his tulips
with her? But the cop wouldn't have an
answer for that one.
"Ah hope y'all find out whatever
y'all's lookin' for. I have thought it over
some, 'cause I never seen nothing like
that before. Ah've thought hard on it,
wondered if I'da started up the cruiser
real quick and drove it off, if she'da
been all right. There mightn't've been
time. No knowing now. But it don't
matter, t' my mind, whether it were an
accident or it weren't. It's a goddamned
shame either way."
"There was nothing you could have
done," the Colonel said softly. "You did
your job, and we appreciate it."
"Well. Thanks. Y'all go 'long now,
and take care, and let me know if ya
have any other questions. This is mah
card if you need anything."
The Colonel put the card in his fake
leather wallet, and we walked toward
home.
"White tulips," I said. "Jake's tulips.
Why?"
"One time last year, she and Takumi
and I were at the Smoking Hole, and
there was this little white daisy on the
bank of the creek, and all of a sudden
she just jumped waist-deep into the
water and waded across and grabbed it.
She put it behind her ear, and when I
asked her about it, she told me that her
parents always put white flowers in her
hair when she was little. Maybe she
wanted to die with white flowers."
"Maybe she was going to return them
to Jake," I said.
"Maybe. But that cop just shit sure
convinced me that it might have been a
suicide."
"Maybe we should just let her be
dead," I said, frustrated. It seemed to me
that nothing we might find out would
make anything any better, and I could not
get the image of the steering wheel
careening into her chest out of my mind,
her chest "fairly well crushed" while she
sucked for a last breath that would never
come, and no, this was not making
anything better. "What if she did do it?" I
asked the Colonel. "We're not any less
guilty. All it does is make her into this
awful, selfish bitch."
"Christ, Pudge. Do you even
remember the person she actually was?
Do you remember how she could be a
selfish bitch? That was part of her, and
you used to know it. It's like now you
only care about the Alaska you made
up."
I sped up, walking ahead of the
Colonel, silent. And he couldn't know,
because he wasn't the last person she
kissed, because he hadn't been left with
an unkeepable promise, because he
wasn't me. Screw this, I thought, and for
the first time, I imagined just going back
home, ditching the Great Perhaps for the
old comforts of school friends.
Whatever their faults, I'd never known
my school friends in Florida to die on
me.
After a considerable distance, the
Colonel jogged up to me and said, "I just
want it to be normal again," he said.
"You and me. Normal. Fun. Just,
normal. And I feel like if we knew—"
"Okay, fine," I cut him off. "Fine. We'll
keep looking."
The Colonel shook his head, but then
he smiled. "I have always appreciated
your enthusiasm, Pudge. And I'm just
going to go ahead and pretend you still
have it until it comes back. Now let's go
home and find out why people off
themselves."
fourteen days after
Warning signs of suicide the Colonel
and I found on the Web:
— Previous suicide attempts
Verbally threatening suicide Giving
away prized possessions Collecting and
discussing methods of suicide
— Expressions of hopelessness and
anger at oneself and/or the world
— Writing, talking, reading, and
drawing about death and/or depression
Suggesting that the person would not
be missed if s/he were gone
— Self-injury
— Recent loss of a friend or family
member through death or suicide
— Sudden and dramatic decline in
academic performance
— Eating disorders, sleeplessness,
excessive sleeping, chronic headaches
Use (or increased use) of mind-altering
substances Loss of interest in sex,
hobbies, and other activities previously
enjoyed Alaska displayed two of those
warning signs. She had lost, although not
recently, her mother. And her drinking,
always pretty steady, had definitely
increased in the last month of her life.
She did talk about dying, but she always
seemed to be at least half kidding.
"I make jokes about death all the
time," the Colonel said. "I made a joke
last week about hanging myself with my
tie. And I'm not gonna off myself. So that
doesn't count. And she didn't give
anything away, and she sure as hell
didn't lose interest in sex. One would
have to like sex an awful lot to make out
with your scrawny ass."
"Funny," I said.
"I know. God, I'm a genius. And her
grades were good. And I don't recall her
talking about killing herself."
"Once, with the cigarettes,
remember? 'You smoke to enjoy it. I
smoke to die.'" "That was a joke."
But when prodded by the Colonel,
maybe to prove to him that I could
remember Alaska as she really was and
not just as I wanted her to be, I kept
returning the conversation to those times
when she would be mean and moody,
when she didn't feel like answering how,
when, why, who, o r what questions.
"She could seem so angry," I thought
aloud.
"What, and I can't?" the Colonel
retorted. "I'm plenty angry, Pudge. And
you haven't been the picture of placidity
of late, either, and you aren't going to off
yourself. Wait, are you?"
"No," I said. And maybe it was only
because Alaska couldn't hit the brakes
and I couldn't hit the accelerator.
Maybe she just had an odd kind of
courage that I lacked, but no.
"Good to know. So yeah, she was up
and down — from fire and brimstone to
smoke and ashes. But partly, this year at
least, it was the whole Marya thing.
Look, Pudge, she obviously wasn't
thinking about killing herself when she
was making out with you. After that, she
was asleep until the phone rang. So she
decided to kill herself at some point
between that ringing phone and crashing,
or it was an accident."
"But why wait until you're six miles
off campus to die?" I asked.
He sighed and shook his head. "She
did like being mysterious. Maybe she
wanted it like this." I laughed then, and
the Colonel said, "What?"
"I was just thinking— Why do you
run head-on into a cop car with its
lights on? and then I thought, Weil, she
hated authority figures."
The Colonel laughed. "Hey, look at
that. Pudge made a funny!"
It felt almost normal, and then my
distance from the event itself seemed to
evaporate and I found myself back in the
gym, hearing the news for the first time,
the Eagle's tears dripping onto his pants,
and I looked over at the Colonel and
thought of all the hours we'd spent on
this foam couch in the past two weeks —
everything she'd ruined. Too pissed off
to cry, I said, "This is only making me
hate her. I don't want to hate her. And
what's the point, if that's all it's making
me do?" Still refusing to answer how
and why questions. Still insisting on an
aura of mystery.
I leaned forward, head between my
knees, and the Colonel placed a hand on
my upper back. "The point is that there
are always answers, Pudge." And then
he pushed air out between his pursed
lips and I could hear the angry quiver in
his voice as he repeated, "There are
always answers. We just have to be
smart enough. The Web says that
suicides usually involve carefully
thought-out plans. So clearly she did not
commit suicide." I felt embarrassed to
be still falling apart two weeks later
when the Colonel could take his
medicine so stoically, and I sat up.
"Okay, fine" I answered. "It wasn't
suicide."
"Although it sure doesn't make sense
as an accident," the Colonel said.
I laughed. "We sure are making
progress."
We were interrupted by Holly
Moser, the senior I knew primarily from
viewing her nude self-portraits over
Thanksgiving with Alaska. Holly hung
with the Weekday Warriors, which
explains why I'd previously said about
two words to her in my life, but she just
came in without knocking and said that
she'd had a mystical indicator of
Alaska's presence.
"I was in the Waffle House, and
suddenly all the lights went off, except
for, like, the light over my booth, which
started flashing. It would be like on for a
second and then off for a while and then
on for a couple of seconds and then off.
And I realized, you know, it was Alaska.
I think she was trying to talk to me in
Morse code. But, like, I don't know
Morse code. She probably didn't know
that. Anyway, I thought you guys should
know."
"Thanks," I said curtly, and she stood
for a while, looking at us, her mouth
opening as if to speak, but the Colonel
was staring at her through half-closed
eyes, his jaw jutting out and his distaste
uncontained. I understood how he felt: I
didn't believe in ghosts who used Morse
code to communicate with people they'd
never liked. And I disliked the
possibility that Alaska would give
someone else peace but not me.
"God, people like that shouldn't be
allowed to live," he said after she left.
"It was pretty stupid."
"It's not just stupid, Pudge. I mean, as
if Alaska would talk to Holly Moser.
God! I can't stand these fake grievers.
Stupid bitch."
I almost told him that Alaska
wouldn't want him to call any woman a
bitch, but there was no use fighting with
the Colonel.
twenty days after
It was Sunday,and the Colonel and I
decided against the cafeteria for dinner,
instead walking off campus and across
Highway 119 to the Sunny Konvenience
Kiosk, where we indulged in a wellbalanced
meal of two oatmeal cream
pies apiece. Seven hundred calories.
Enough energy to sustain a man for half a
day. We sat on the curb in front of the
store, and I finished dinner in four bites.
"I'm going to call Jake tomorrow,
just so you know. I got his phone number
from Takumi."
"Fine," I said.
I heard a bell jangle behind me and
turned toward the opening door.
"Y'all's loitering," said the woman
who'd just sold us dinner.
"We're eating," the Colonel
answered.
The woman shook her head and
ordered, as if to a dog, "Git."
So we walked behind the store and
sat by the stinking, fetid Dumpster.
"Enough with the fine's already,
Pudge. That's ridiculous. I'm going to
call Jake, and I'm going to write down
everything he says, and then we're going
to sit down together and try and figure
out what happened."
"No. You're on your own with that. I
don't want to know what happened
between her and Jake."
The Colonel sighed and pulled a
pack of Pudge Fund cigarettes of his
jeans pocket. "Why not?"
"Because I don't want to! Do I have
provide you with an in-depth analysis of
every decision I make?"
The Colonel lit the cigarette with a
lighter I'd paid for and took a drag.
"Whatever. It needs to be figured out,
and I need your help to do it, because
between the two of us we knew her
pretty well. So that's that."
I stood up and stared down at him
sitting smugly, and he blew a thin stream
of smoke at my face, and I'd had enough.
"I'm tired of following orders, asshole!
I'm not going to sit with you and discuss
the finer points of her relationship with
Jake, goddamn it. I can't say it any
clearer: / don't want to know about
them. I already know what she told me,
and that's all I need to know, and you can
be a condescending prick as long as
you'd like, but I'm not going to sit around
and chat with you about how goddamned
much she loved Jake! Now give me my
cigarettes." The Colonel threw the pack
on the ground and was up in a flash, a
fistful of my sweater in his hand, trying
but failing to pull me down to his height.
"You don't even care about her!" he
shouted. "All that matters is you and
your precious fucking fantasy that you
and Alaska had this goddamned secret
love affair and she was going to leave
Jake for you and you'd live happily ever
after. But she kissed a lot of guys, Pudge.
And if she were here, we both know that
she would still be Jake's girlfriend and
that there'd be nothing but drama
between the two of you — not love, not
sex, just you pining after her and her
like, 'You're cute, Pudge, but I love
Jake.' If she loved you so much, why did
she leave you that night?
And if you loved her so much, why'd
you help her go? I was drunk. What's
your excuse?"
The Colonel let go of my sweater,
and I reached down and picked up the
cigarettes. Not screaming, not through
clenched teeth, not with the veins pulsing
in my forehead, but calmly. Calmly. I
looked down at the Colonel and said,
"Fuck you."
The vein-pulsing screaming came
later, after I had jogged across Highway
119 and through the dorm circle and
across the soccer field and down the dirt
road to the bridge, when I found myself
at the Smoking Hole. I picked up a blue
chair and threw it against the concrete
wall, and the clang of plastic on
concrete echoed beneath the bridge as
the chair fell limply on its side, and then
I lay on my back with my knees hanging
over the precipice and screamed. I
screamed because the Colonel was a
self-satisfied, condescending bastard,
and I screamed because he was right, for
I did want to believe that I'd had a secret
love affair with Alaska. Did she love
me? Would she have left Jake for me?
Or was it just another impulsive Alaska
moment? It was not enough to be the last
guy she kissed.
I wanted to be the last one she loved.
And I knew I wasn't. I knew it, and I
hated her for it. I hated her for not caring
about me. I hated her for leaving that
night, and I hated myself, too, not only
because I let her go but because if I had
been enough for her, she wouldn't have
even wanted to leave. She would have
just lain with me and talked and cried,
and I would have listened and kissed at
her tears as they pooled in her eyes.
I turned my head and looked at one
of the little blue plastic chairs on its
side. I wondered if there would ever be
a day when I didn't think about Alaska,
wondered whether I should hope for a
time when she would be a distant
memory — recalled only on the
anniversary of her death, or maybe a
couple of weeks after, remembering only
after having forgotten.
I knew that I would know more dead
people. The bodies pile up. Could there
be a space in my memory for each of
them, or would I forget a little of Alaska
every day for the rest of my life?
Once, early on in the year, she and I
had walked down to the Smoking Hole,
and she jumped into Culver Creek with
her flip-flops still on. She stepped
across the creek, picking her steps
carefully over the mossy rocks, and
grabbed a waterlogged stick from the
creek bank. As I sat on the concrete, my
feet dangling toward the water, she
overturned rocks with the stick and
pointed out the skittering crawfish.
"You boil 'em and then suck the
heads out," she said excitedly.
"That's where all the good stuff is —
the heads."
She taught me everything I knew
about crawfish and kissing and pink
wine and poetry. She made me different.
I lit a cigarette and spit into the
creek. "You can't just make me different
and then leave," I said out loud to her.
"Because I was fine before, Alaska.
I was fine with just me and last words
and school friends, and you can't just
make me different and then die." For she
had embodied the Great Perhaps — she
had proved to me that it was worth it to
leave behind my minor life for grander
maybes, and now she was gone and with
her my faith in perhaps. I could call
everything the Colonel said and did
"fine." I could try to pretend that I didn't
care anymore, but it could never be true
again. You can't just make yourself
matter and then die, Alaska, because
now I am irretrievably different, and I'm
sorry I let you go, yes, but you made the
choice. You left me Perhapsless, stuck in
your goddamned labyrinth. And now I
don't even know if you chose the straight
and fast way out, if you left me like this
on purpose. And so I never knew you,
did I? I can't remember, because I never
knew.
And as I stood up to walk home and
make my peace with the Colonel, I tried
to imagine her in that chair, but I could
not remember whether she crossed her
legs. I could still see her smiling at me
with half of Mona Lisa's smirk, but I
couldn't picture her hands well enough to
see her holding a cigarette. I needed, I
decided, to really know her, because I
needed more to remember. Before I
could begin the shameful process of
forgetting the how and the why of her
living and dying, I needed to learn it:
How. Why. When. Where. What.
At Room 43, after quickly offered
and accepted apologies, the Colonel
said, "We've made a tactical decision to
push back calling Jake. We're going to
pursue some other avenues first."
twenty-one days after
As Dr. Hyde shuffled into class the
next morning, Takumi sat down next to
me and wrote a note on the edge of his
notebook. Lunch at Mclnedible, it read.
I scribbled Okay on my own
notebook and then turned to a blank page
as Dr. Hyde started talking about Sufism,
the mystical sect of Islam. I'd only
scanned through the reading — I'd been
studying only enough not to fail— but in
my scanning, I'd come across great last
words. This poor Sufi dressed in rags
walked into a jewelry store owned by a
rich merchant and asked him, "Do you
know how you're going to die?" The
merchant answered, "No. No one knows
how they're going to die." And the Sufi
said, "I do."
"How?" asked the merchant.
And the Sufi lay down, crossed his
arms, said, "Like this," and died,
whereupon the merchant promptly gave
up his store to live a life of poverty in
pursuit of the kind of spiritual wealth the
dead Sufi had acquired.
But Dr. Hyde was telling a different
story, one that I'd skipped. "Karl Marx
famously called religion 'the opiate of
the masses.' Buddhism, particularly as it
is popularly practiced, promises
improvement through karma. Islam and
Christianity promise eternal paradise to
the faithful. And that is a powerful
opiate, certainly, the hope of a better life
to come. But there's a Sufi story that
challenges the notion that people believe
only because they need an opiate. Rabe'a
al-Adiwiyah, a great woman saint of
Sufism, was seen running through the
streets of her hometown, Basra, carrying
a torch in one hand and a bucket of water
in the other. When someone asked her
what she was doing, she answered, 'I am
going to take this bucket of water and
pour it on the flames of hell, and then I
am going to use this torch to burn down
the gates of paradise so that people will
not love God for want of heaven or fear
of hell, but because He is God.'" A
woman so strong she burns heaven and
drenches hell. Alaska would have liked
this Rabe'a woman, I wrote in my
notebook. But even so, the afterlife
mattered to me. Heaven and hell and
reincarnation. As much as I wanted to
know how Alaska had died, I wanted to
know where she was now, if anywhere. I
liked to imagine her looking down on us,
still aware of us, but it seemed like a
fantasy, and I never really felt it — just
as the Colonel had said at the funeral
that she wasn't there, wasn't anywhere. I
couldn't honestly imagine her as anything
but dead, her body rotting in Vine
Station, the rest of her just a ghost alive
only in our remembering. Like Rabe'a, I
didn't think people should believe in
God because of heaven and hell. But I
didn't feel a need to run around with a
torch. You can't burn down a made-up
place.
After class, as Takumi picked
through his fries at Mclnedible, eating
only the crunchiest, I felt the total loss of
her, still reeling from the idea that she
was not only gone from this world but
from all of them.
"How have you been?" I asked.
"Uh," he said, a mouth full of fries,
"nan good. You?"
"Not good." I took a bite of
cheeseburger. I'd gotten a plastic stock
car with my Happy Meal, and it sat
overturned on the table. I spun the
wheels.
"I miss her,"Takumi said, pushing
away his tray, uninterested in the
remaining soggy fries.
"Yeah. I do, too. I'm sorry, Takumi,"
and I meant it in the largest possible
way. I was sorry we ended up like this,
spinning wheels at a McDonald's. Sorry
the person who had brought us together
now lay dead between us. I was sorry I
let her die. Sorry I haven't talked to you
because you couldn't know the truth
about the Colonel and me, and I hated
being around you and having to
pretend that my grief is this
uncomplicated thing — pretending that
she died and I miss her instead of that
she died because of me.
"Me too. You're not dating Lara
anymore, are you?"
"I don't think so."
"Okay. She was kind of wondering."
I had been ignoring her, but by then
she had begun to ignore me back, so I
figured it was over, but maybe not.
"Well," I told Takumi, "I just can't
— I don't know, man. That's pretty
complicated."
"Sure. She'll understand. Sure. All
good."
"Okay."
"Listen, Pudge. I — ah, I don't know.
It sucks, huh?"
"Yeah."
twenty-seven days after
Six days later four Sundays after the
last Sunday, the Colonel and I were
trying to shoot each other with paintball
guns while turning 900s in a half pipe.
"We need booze. And we need to
borrow the Eagle's Breathalyzer."
"Borrow it? Do you know where it
is?"
"Yeah. He's never made you take
one?"
"Urn. No. He thinks I'm a nerd."
"You are a nerd, Pudge. But you're
not gonna let a detail like that keep you
from drinking." Actually, I hadn't drunk
since that night, and didn't feel
particularly inclined to ever take it up
ever again.
Then I nearly elbowed the Colonel
in the face, swinging my arms wildly as
if contorting my body in the right ways
mattered as much as pressing the right
buttons at the right moments — the same
video-game-playing delusion that had
always gripped Alaska. But the Colonel
was so focused on the game he didn't
even notice. "Do you have a plan for
how, exactly, we're going to steal the
Breathalyzer from inside the Eagle's
house?"
The Colonel looked over at me and
said, "Do you suck at this game?" and
then, without turning back to the screen,
shot my skater in the balls with a blue
paint blast. "But first, we gotta get some
liquor, because the ambrosia's sour and
my booze connection is—"
"POOF.Gone," I finished.
When I opened his door, Takumi
was sitting at his desk, boxy headphones
surrounding his entire head, bouncing his
head to the beat. He seemed oblivious to
us. "Hey," I said. Nothing. "Takumi!"
Nothing. "TAKUMI!" He turned around
and pulled off his headphones. I closed
the door behind me and said, "You got
any alcohol?"
"Why?" he asked.
"Uh, because we want to get drunk?"
the Colonel answered.
"Great. I'll join you."
"Takumi," the Colonel said. "This is
— we need to do this alone."
"No. I've had enough of that shit."
Takumi stood up, walked into his
bathroom, and came out with a Gatorade
bottle filled with clear liquid. "I keep it
in the medicine cabinet," Takumi said.
"On account of how it's medicine."
He pocketed the bottle and then
walked out of the room, leaving the door
open behind him. A moment later, he
peeked his head back in and, brilliantly
mimicking the Colonel's bossy bass
voice, said, "Christ, you comin' or
what?"
"Takumi," the Colonel said. "Okay.
Look, what we're doing is a little
dangerous, and I don't want you caught
up in it. Honestly. But, listen, we'll tell
you everything starting tomorrow."
"I'm tired of all this secret shit. She
was my friend, too."
"Tomorrow. Honestly."
He pulled the bottle out of his pocket
and tossed it to me.
"Tomorrow," he said.
"I don't really want him to know," I
said as we walked back to the room, the
Gatorade bottle stuffed in the pocket of
my sweatshirt.
"He'll hate us."
"Yeah, well, he'll hate us more if we
keep pretending he doesn't exist," the
Colonel answered.
Fifteen minutes later, I stood at the
Eagle's doorstep.
He opened the door with a spatula in
hand, smiled, and said, "Miles, come in.
I was just making an egg sandwich.
Want one?"
"No thanks," I said, following the
Eagle into his kitchen.
My job was to keep him out of his
living room for thirty seconds so the
Colonel could get the Breathalyzer
undetected. I coughed loudly to let the
Colonel know the coast was clear. The
Eagle picked up his egg sandwich and
took a bite. "To what do I owe the
pleasure of your visit?" he asked.
"I just wanted to tell you that the
Colonel — I mean, Chip Martin — he's
my roommate, you know, he's having a
tough time in Latin."
"Well, he's not attending the class,
from what I understand, which can make
it very difficult to learn the language."
He walked toward me. I coughed again,
and backpedaled, the Eagle and I
tangoing our way toward his living
room.
"Right, well, he's up all night every
night thinking about Alaska," I said,
standing up straight and tall, trying to
block the Eagle's view of the living
room with my none-too-wide shoulders.
"They were very close, you know."
"I know that—" he said, and in the
living room, the Colonel's sneakers
squeaked against the hardwood floor.
The Eagle looked at me quizzically and
sidestepped me. I quickly said, "Is that
burner on?" and pointed toward the
frying pan.
The Eagle wheeled around, looked
at the clearly not-on burner, then dashed
into the living room.
Empty. He turned back to me. "Are
you up to something, Miles?"
"No, sir. Honestly. I just wanted to
talk about Chip."
He arched his eyebrows, skeptical.
"Well, I understand that this is a
devastating loss for Alaska's close
friends.
It's just awful. There's no comfort to
this grief, is there?"
"No sir."
"I'm sympathetic to Chip's troubles.
But school is important. Alaska would
have wanted, I'm sure, for Chip's studies
to continue unimpeded."
I'm sure,I thought. I thanked the
Eagle, and he promised me an egg
sandwich at some point in the future,
which made me nervous that he would
just show up at our room one afternoon
with an egg sandwich in hand to find us
A . illegally smoking while the Colonel
B. illegally drank milk and vodka out of
a gallon jug.
Halfway across the dorm circle, the
Colonel ran up to me. "That was smooth,
with the 'Is that burner on?' If you hadn't
pulled that, I was toast. Although I guess
I'll have to start going to Latin. Stupid
Latin."
"Did you get it?" I asked.
"Yeah," he said. "Yeah. God, I hope
he doesn't go looking for it tonight.
Although, really, he could never suspect
anything. Why would someone steal a
Breathalyzer?"
At two o'clock in the morning, the
Colonel took his sixth shot of vodka,
grimaced, then frantically motioned with
his hand toward the bottle of Mountain
Dew I was drinking. I handed it to him,
and he took a long pull on it.
"I don't think I'll be able to go to
Latin tomorrow," he said. His words
were slightly slurred, as if his tongue
were swollen.
"One more," I pleaded.
"Okay. This is it, though." He poured
a sip of vodka into a Dixie cup,
swallowed, pursed his lips, and
squeezed his hands into tight little fists.
"Oh God, this is bad. It's so much better
with milk. This better be point twofour."
"We have to wait for fifteen minutes
after your last drink before we test it," I
said, having downloaded instructions for
the Breathalyzer off the Internet. "Do you
feel drunk?"
"If drunk were cookies, I'd be
Famous Amos."
We laughed. "Chips Ahoy! would
have been funnier," I said.
"Forgive me. Not at my best."
I held the Breathalyzer in my hand, a
sleek, silver gadget about the size of a
small remote control. Beneath an LCD
screen was a small hole. I blew into it to
test it: 0.00, it read. I figured it was
working.
After fifteen minutes, I handed it to
the Colonel. "Blow really hard onto it
for at least two seconds," I said.
He looked up at me. "Is that what
you told Lara in the TV room? Because,
see, Pudge, they only call it a blow job."
"Shut up and blow," I said.
His cheeks puffed out, the Colonel
blew into the hole hard and long, his
face turning red.
"Oh no," the Colonel said. "Oh
God."
"You're two-thirds of the way there,"
I said encouragingly.
"Yeah, but I'm like three-fourths of
the way to puking."
"Well, obviously it's possible. She
did it. C'mon! You can out drink a girl,
can't you?"
"Give me the Mountain Dew," he
said stoically.
And then I heard footsteps outside.
Footsteps. We'd waited till 1:00 to turn
on the lights, figuring everyone would be
long asleep — it was a school night after
all— but footsteps, shit, and as the
Colonel looked at me confused, I
grabbed the Breathalyzer from him and
stuffed it between the foam cushions of
the couch and grabbed the Dixie cup and
the Gatorade bottle of vodka and stashed
them behind the coffee table, and in one
motion I grabbed a cigarette from a pack
and lit it, hoping the smell of smoke
would cover up the smell of booze. I
puffed the cigarette without inhaling,
trying to smoke up the room, and I was
almost back to the couch when the three
quick knocks came against the door and
the Colonel looked at me, his eyes wide,
his suddenly unpromising future flashing
before his eyes, and I whispered, "Cry,"
as the Eagle turned the knob.
The Colonel hunched forward, his
head between his knees and his
shoulders shaking, and I put my arm
around him as the Eagle came in.
"I'm sorry," I said before the Eagle
could say anything. "He's having a tough
night."
"Are you smoking?" the Eagle
asked. "In your room? Four hours after
lights-out?"
I dropped the cigarette into a halfempty
Coke can. "I'm sorry, sir. I'm just
trying to stay awake with him."
The Eagle walked up toward the
couch, and I felt the Colonel start to rise,
but I held his shoulders down firmly,
because if the Eagle smelled the
Colonel's breath we were done for sure.
"Miles," the Eagle said. "I understand
that this is a difficult time for you. But
you will respect the rules of this school,
or you will matriculate someplace else.
I'll see you in Jury tomorrow. Is there
anything I can do for you, Chip?"
Without looking up, the Colonel
answered in a quivering, tear-soaked
voice, "No, sir. I'm just glad I have
Miles."
"Well, I am, too," the Eagle said.
"Perhaps you should encourage him to
live within the confines of our rules, lest
he risk his place on this campus."
"Yes sir," the Colonel said.
"Y'all can leave your lights on until
you're ready to go to bed. I'll see you
tomorrow, Miles."
"Good night, sir," I said, imagining
the Colonel sneaking the Breathalyzer
back into the Eagle's house while I got
harangued at Jury. As the Eagle closed
the door behind him, the Colonel shot
up, smiling at me, and still nervous that
the Eagle might be outside, whispered,
"That was a thing of beauty."
"I learned from the best," I said.
"Now drink."
An hour later, the Gatorade bottle
mostly empty, the Colonel hit. 24.
"Thank you, Jesus!" he exclaimed,
and then added, "This is awful. This is
not fun drunk."
I got up and cleared the coffee table
out of the way so the Colonel could walk
the length of the room without hitting any
obstacles, and said, "Okay, can you
stand?"
The Colonel pushed his arms into the
foam of the couch and began to rise, but
then fell backward onto the couch, lying
on his back. "Spinning room," he
observed. "Gonna puke."
"Don't puke. That will ruin
everything."
I decided to give him a field sobriety
test, like the cops do. "Okay. Get over
here and try to walk a straight line."
He rolled off the couch and fell to
the floor, and I caught him beneath his
armpits and held him up. I positioned
him in between two tiles of the linoleum
floor. "Follow that line of tiles. Walk
straight, toe to heel." He raised one leg
and immediately leaned to the left, his
arms windmilling. He took a single
unsteady step, sort of a waddle, as his
feet were seemingly unable to land
directly in front of each other. He
regained his balance briefly, then took a
step backward and landed on the couch.
"I fail," he said matter-of-factly.
"Okay, how's your depth
perception?"
"My what perwhatshun?"
"Look at me. Is there one of me? Are
there two of me? Could you accidentally
drive into me if I were a cop car?"
"Everything's very spinny, but I don't
think so. This is bad. Was she really like
this?"
"Apparently. Could you drive like
this?"
"Oh God no. No. No. She was really
drunk, huh."
"Yeah."
"We were really stupid."
"Yeah."
"I'm spinning. But no. No cop car. I
can see."
"So there's your evidence."
"Maybe she fell asleep. I feel
awfully sleepy."
"We'll find out," I said, trying to play
the role that the Colonel had always
played for me.
"Not tonight," he answered.
"Tonight, we're gonna throw up a little,
and then we are going to sleep through
our hangover."
"Don't forget about Latin."
"Right. Fucking Latin."
twenty-eight days after
The colonel made it to Latin the next
morning—"I feel awesome right now,
because I'm still drunk. But God help me
in a couple of hours" — and I took a
French test for which I had studied un
petit peu. I did all right on the multiple
choice (which-verb-tense-makes-sensehere
type questions), but the essay
question, In Le Petit Prince, what is the
significance of the rose? threw me a bit.
Had I read The Little Prince in
English or French, I suspect this question
might have been quite easy.
Unfortunately, I'd spent the evening
getting the Colonel drunk. So I
answered, Elle symbolise I'amour ("It
symbolizes love"). Madame O'Malley
had left us with an entire page to answer
the question, but I figured I'd covered it
nicely in three words.
I'd kept up in my classes well enough
to get B-minuses and not worry my
parents, but I didn't really care much
anymore. The significance of the rose? I
thought. Who gives a shit? What's the
significance of the white tulips?
There was a question worth
answering.
After I'd gotten a lecture and ten
work hours at Jury, I came back to Room
43 to find the Colonel telling Takumi
everything — well, everything except
the kiss. I walked in to the Colonel
saying, "So we helped her go."
"You set off the fireworks," he said.
"How'd you know about the
fireworks?"
"I've been doing a bit of
investigating," Takumi answered. "Well,
anyway, that was dumb. You shouldn't
have done it. But we all let her go,
really," he said, and I wondered what
the hell he meant by that, but I didn't
have time to ask before he said to me,
"So you think it was suicide?"
"Maybe," I said. "I don't see how she
could have hit the cop by accident unless
she was asleep."
"Maybe she was going to visit her
father," Takumi said. "Vine Station is on
the way."
"Maybe," I said. "Everything's a
maybe, isn't it?"
The Colonel reached in his pocket
for a pack of cigarettes. "Well, here's
another one: Maybe Jake has the
answers," he said. "We've exhausted
other strategies, so I'm calling him
tomorrow, okay?"
I wanted answers now, too, but not
to some questions. "Yeah, okay," I said.
"But listen — don't tell me anything
that's not relevant. I don't want to know
anything unless it's going to help me
know where she was going and why."
"Me neither, actually," Takumi said.
"I feel like maybe some of that shit
should stay private."
The Colonel stuffed a towel under
the door, lit a cigarette, and said, "Fair
enough, kids. We'll work on a need-toknow
basis."
twenty-nine days after
As I walked home from classes the
next day, I saw the Colonel sitting on the
bench outside the pay phone, scribbling
into a notebook balanced on his knees as
he cradled the phone between his ear
and shoulder.
I hurried into Room 43, where I
found Takumi playing the racing game on
mute. "How long has he been on the
phone?" I asked.
"Dunno. He was on when I got here
twenty minutes ago. He must have
skipped Smart Boy Math. Why, are you
scared Jake's gonna drive down here and
kick your ass for letting her go?"
"Whatever," I said, thinking, This is
precisely why we shouldn't have told
him. I walked into the bathroom, turned
on the shower, and lit a cigarette.
Takumi came in not long after.
"What's up?" he said.
"Nothing. I just want to know what
happened to her."
"Like you really want to know the
truth? Or like you want to find out that
she fought with him and was on her way
to break up with him and was going to
come back here and fall into your arms
and you were going to make hot, sweet
love and have genius babies who
memorized last words and poetry?"
"If you're pissed at me, just say so."
"I'm not pissed at you for letting her
go. But I'm tired of you acting like you
were the only guy who ever wanted her.
Like you had some monopoly on liking
her," Takumi answered. I stood up, lifted
the toilet seat, and flushed my unfinished
cigarette.
I stared at him for a moment, and
then said, "I kissed her that night, and
I've got a monopoly on that."
"What?" he stammered.
"I kissed her."
His mouth opened as if to speak, but
he said nothing. We stared at each other
for a while, and I felt ashamed of myself
for what amounted to bragging, and
finally I said, "I — look, you know how
she was. She wanted to do something,
and she did it. I was probably just the
guy who happened to be there."
"Yeah. Well, I was never that guy,"
he said. "I — well, Pudge, God knows I
can't blame you."
"Don't tell Lara."
He was nodding as we heard the
three quick knocks on the front door that
meant the Eagle, and I thought, Shit,
caught twice in a week, and Takumi
pointed into the shower, and so we
jumped in together and pulled the curtain
shut, the too-low showerhead spitting
water onto us from rib cage down.
Forced to stand closer together than
seemed entirely necessary, we stayed
there, silent, the sputtering shower
slowly soaking our T-shirts and jeans
for a few long minutes, while we waited
for the steam to lift the smoke into the
vents. But the Eagle never knocked on
the bathroom door, and eventually
Takumi turned off the shower. I opened
the bathroom door a crack and peeked
out to see the Colonel sitting on the foam
couch, his feet propped up on thecoffee
table, finishing Takumi's NASCAR race.
I opened the door and Takumi and I
walked out, fully clothed and dripping
wet.
"Well, there's something you don't
see every day," the Colonel said
nonchalantly.
"What the hell?" I asked.
"I knocked like the Eagle to scare
you." He smiled. "But shit, if y'all need
privacy, just leave a note on the door
next time."
Takumi and I laughed, and then
Takumi said, "Yeah, Pudge and I were
getting a little testy, but man, ever since
we showered together, Pudge, I feel
really close to you."
"So how'd it go?" I asked. I sat down
on the coffee table, and Takumi plopped
down on the couch next to the Colonel,
both of us wet and vaguely cold but
more concerned with the Colonel's talk
with Jake than with getting dry.
"It was interesting. Here's what you
need to know: He gave her those
flowers, like we thought. They didn't
fight. He just called because he had
promised to call at the exact moment of
their eight-month anniversary, which
happened to be three-oh-two in thea.m.,
which — let's agree — is a little
ridiculous, and I guess somehow she
heard the phone ringing. So they talked
about nothing for like five minutes, and
then completely out of nowhere, she
freaked out."
"Completely out of nowhere?"
Takumi asked.
"Allow me to consult my notes." The
Colonel flipped through his notebook.
"Okay. Jake says, 'Did you have a nice
anniversary?' and then Alaska says, "I
had a splendid anniversary,'" and I could
hear in the Colonel's reading the
excitement of her voice, the way she
leaped onto certain words like splendid
and fantastic and absolutely.
"Then it's quiet, then Jake says,
'What are you doing?' and Alaska says,
'Nothing, just doodling,' and then she
says, 'Oh God.' And then she says, 'Shit
shit shit' and starts sobbing, and told him
she had to go but she'd talk to him later,
but she didn't say she was driving to see
him, and Jake doesn't think she was. He
doesn't know where she was going, but
he says she always asked if she could
come up and see him, and she didn't ask,
so she must not have been coming. Hold
on, lemme find the quote." He flipped a
page in the notebook. "Okay, here: "She
said she'd talk to me later, not that she'd
see me.'" "She tells me 'To be continued'
and tells him she'll talk to him later," I
observed.
"Yes. Noted. Planning for a future.
Admittedly inconsistent with suicide. So
then she comes back into her room
screaming about forgetting something.
And then her headlong race comes to its
end. So no answers, really."
"Well, we know where she wasn't
going."
"Unless she was feeling particularly
impulsive," Takumi said. He looked at
me. "And from the sound of things, she
was feeling rather impulsive that night."
The Colonel looked over at me
curiously, and I nodded.
"Yeah," Takumi said. "I know."
"Okay, then. And you were pissed,
but then you took a shower with Pudge
and it's all good. Excellent. So, so that
night…" the Colonel continued.
And we tried to resurrect the
conversation that last night as best we
could for Takumi, but neither of us
remembered it terribly well, partly
because the Colonel was drunk and I
wasn't paying attention until she brought
up Truth or Dare. And, anyway, we
didn't know how much it might mean.
Last words are always harder to
remember when no one knows that
someone's about to die.
"I mean," the Colonel said, "I think
she and I were talking about how much I
adored skateboarding on the computer
but how it would never even occur to me
to try and step on a skateboard in real
life, and then she said, "Let's play Truth
or Dare' and then you fucked her."
"Wait, you fucked her? In front of
the Colonel?" Takumi cried.
"I didn't fuck her."
"Calm down, guys," the Colonel
said, throwing up his hands. "It's a
euphemism."
"For what?" Takumi asked.
"Kissing."
"Brilliant euphemism." Takumi
rolled his eyes. "Am I the only one who
thinks that might be significant?"
"Yeah, that never occurred to me
before," I deadpanned. "But now I don't
know. She didn't tell Jake. It couldn't
have been that important."
"Maybe she was racked with guilt,"
he said.
"Jake said she seemed normal on the
phone before she freaked out," the
Colonel said. "But it must have been that
phone call. Something happened that we
aren't seeing." The Colonel ran his hands
through his thick hair, frustrated. "Christ,
something. Something inside of her. And
now we just have to figure out what that
was."
"So we just have to read the mind of
a dead person," Takumi said. "Easy
enough."
"Precisely. Want to get shitfaced?"
the Colonel asked.
"I don't feel like drinking," I said.
The Colonel reached into the foam
recesses of the couch and pulled out
Takumi's Gatorade bottle. Takumi didn't
want any either, but the Colonel just
smirked and said, "More for me," and
chugged.
thirty-seven days after
The next Wednesday,I ran into Lara
after religion class — literally. I'd seen
her, of course. I'd seen her almost every
day — in English or sitting in the library
whispering to her roommate, Katie. I
saw her at lunch and dinner at the
cafeteria, and I probably would have
seen her at breakfast, if I'd ever gotten
up for it. And surely, she saw me as
well, but we hadn't, until that morning,
looked at each other simultaneously.
By now, I assumed she'd forgotten
me. After all, we only dated for about a
day, albeit an eventful one. But when I
plowed right into her left shoulder as I
hustled toward precalc, she spun around
and looked up at me. Angry, and not
because of the bump. "I'm sorry," I
blurted out, and she just squinted at me
like someone about to either fight or cry,
and disappeared silently into a
classroom. First two words I'd said to
her in a month.
I wanted to want to talk to her. I
knew I'd been awful— Imagine, I kept
telling myself, if you were Lara, with a
dead friend and a silent ex-boy friend
— but I only had room for one true want,
and she was dead, and I wanted to know
the how and why of it, and Lara couldn't
tell me, and that was all that mattered.
forty-five days after
For weeks,the Colonel and I had
relied on charity to support our cigarette
habit — we'd gotten free or cheap packs
from everyone from Molly Tan to the
once-crew-cutted Longwell Chase. It
was as if people wanted to help and
couldn't think of a better way. But by the
end of February, we ran out of charity.
Just as well, really. I never felt right
taking people's gifts, because they did
not know that we'd loaded the bullets
and put the gun in her hand.
So after our classes, Takumi drove
us to Coosa "We Cater to Your Spiritual
Needs" Liquors. That afternoon, Takumi
and I had learned the disheartening
results of our first major precalc test of
the semester. Possibly because Alaska
was no longer available to teach us
precalc over a pile of Mclnedible french
fries and possibly because neither of us
had really studied, we were both in
danger of getting progress reports sent
home.
"The thing is that I just don't find
precalc very interesting," Takumi said
matter-of-factly.
"It might be hard to explain that to
the director of admissions at Harvard,"
the Colonel responded.
"I don't know," I said. "I find it pretty
compelling."
And we laughed, but the laughs
drifted into a thick, pervasive silence,
and I knew we were all thinking of her,
dead and laughless, cold, no longer
Alaska. The idea that Alaska didn't exist
still stunned me every time I thought
about it. She's rotting underground in
Vine Station, Alabama, I thought, but
even that wasn't quite it. Her body was
there, but she was nowhere, nothing,
POOF.
The times that were the most fun
seemed always to be followed by
sadness now, because it was when life
started to feel like it did when she was
with us that we realized how utterly,
totally gone she was.
I bought the cigarettes. I'd never
entered Coosa Liquors, but it was every
bit as desolate as Alaska described. The
dusty wooden floor creaked as I made
my way to the counter, and I saw a large
barrel filled with brackish water that
purported to containlive bait, but in fact
contained a veritable school of dead,
floating minnows. The woman behind
the counter smiled at me with all four of
her teeth when I asked her for a carton of
Marlboro Lights.
"You go t' Culver Creek?" she asked
me, and I did not know whether to
answer truthfully, since no high-school
student was likely to be nineteen, but she
grabbed the carton of cigarettes from
beneath her and put it on the counter
without asking for an ID, so I said, "Yes,
ma'am."
"How's school?" she asked.
"Pretty good," I answered.
"Heard y'all had a death up there."
"Yes'm," I say.
"I's awful sorry t' hear it."
"Yes'm."
The woman, whose name I did not
know because this was not the sort of
commercial establishment to waste
money on name tags, had one long, white
hair growing from a mole on her left
cheek. It wasn't disgusting, exactly, but I
couldn't stop glancing at it and then
looking away.
Back in the car, I handed a pack of
cigarettes to the Colonel.
We rolled down the windows,
although the February cold bit at my face
and the loud wind made conversation
impossible. I sat in my quarter of the car
and smoked, wondering why the old
woman at Coosa Liquors didn't just pull
that one hair out of her mole. The wind
blew through Takumi's rolled-down
window in front of me and against my
face. I scooted to the middle of the
backseat and looked up at the Colonel
sitting shotgun, smiling, his face turned
to the wind blowing in through his
window.
forty-six days after
I didn't want to talk to lara,but the
next day at lunch, Takumi pulled the
ultimate guilt trip. "How do you think
Alaska would feel about this shit?" he
asked as he stared across the cafeteria at
Lara. She was sitting three tables away
from us with her roommate, Katie, who
was telling some story, and Lara smiled
whenever Katie laughed at one of her
own jokes. Lara scooped up a forkful of
canned corn and held it above her plate,
moving her mouth to it and bowing her
head toward her lap as she took the bite
from the fork — a quiet eater.
"She could talk to m e , " I told
Takumi.
Takumi shook his head. His open
mouth gooey with mashed potatoes, he
said, "Yuh ha' to." He swallowed. "Let
me ask you a question, Pudge. When
you're old and gray and your
grandchildren are sitting on your knee
and look up at you and say,
'Grandpappy, who gave you your first
blow job?' do you want to have to tell
them it was some girl you spent the rest
of high school ignoring? No!" He
smiled. "You want to say, 'My dear
friend Lara Buterskaya. Lovely girl.
Prettier than your grandma by a wide
margin.'" I laughed. So yeah, okay. I had
to talk to Lara.
After classes, I walked over to
Lara's room and knocked, and then she
stood in the doorway, looking like,
What?
What now? You've done the damage
you could, Pudge, and I looked past her,
into the room I'd only entered once,
where I learned that kissing or no, I
couldn't talk to her — and before the
silence could get too uncomfortable, I
talked. "I'm sorry," I said.
"For what?" she asked, still looking
toward me but not quite at me.
"For ignoring you. For everything," I
said. "You deedn't have to be my
boyfriend." She looked so pretty, her big
eyes blinking fast, her cheeks soft and
round, and still the roundness could only
remind me of Alaska's thin face and her
high cheekbones. But I could live with it
— and, anyway, I had to. "You could
have just been my friend," she said.
"I know. I screwed up. I'm sorry."
"Don't forgive that asshole," Katie
cried from inside the room.
"I forgeeve you." Lara smiled and
hugged me, her hands tight around the
small of my back. I wrapped my arms
around her shoulders and smelled
violets in her hair.
"I don't forgive you," Katie said,
appearing in the doorway. And although
Katie and I were not well acquainted,
she felt comfortable enough to knee me
in the balls. She smiled then, and as I
crumpled into a bow, Katie said, "Now I
forgive you."
Lara and I took a walk to the lake —
sans Katie — and we talked. We talked
— about Alaska and about the past
month, about how she had to miss me
and miss Alaska, while I only had to
miss Alaska (which was true enough). I
told her as much of the truth as I could,
from the firecrackers to the Pelham
Police Department and the white tulips.
"I loved her," I said, and Lara said
she loved her, too, and I said, "I know,
but that's why. I loved her, and after she
died I couldn't think about anything else.
It felt, like, dishonest.
Like cheating."
"That's not a good reason," she said.
"I know," I answered.
She laughed softly. "Well, good then.
As long as you know." I knew I wasn't
going to erase that anger, but we were
talking.
As darkness spread that evening, the
frogs croaked and a few newly
resurrected insects buzzed about
campus, and the four of us — Takumi,
Lara, the Colonel, and I — walked
through the cold gray light of a full moon
to the Smoking Hole.
"Hey, Colonel, why do you call eet
the Smoking Hole?" Lara asked. "Eet's,
like, a tunnel."
"It's like fishing hole," the Colonel
said. "Like, if we fished, we'd fish here.
But we smoke. I don't know. I think
Alaska named it." The Colonel pulled a
cigarette out of his pack and threw it into
the water.
"What the hell?" I asked.
"For her," he said.
I half smiled and followed his lead,
throwing in a cigarette of my own. I
handed Takumi and Lara cigarettes, and
they followed suit. The smokes bounced
and danced in the stream for a few
moments, and then they floated out of
sight.
I was not religious, but I liked
rituals. I liked the idea of connecting an
action with remembering. In China, the
Old Man had told us, there are days
reserved for grave cleaning, where you
make gifts to the dead. And I imagined
that Alaska would want a smoke, and so
it seemed to me that the Colonel had
begun an excellent ritual.
The Colonel spit into the stream and
broke the silence. "Funny thing, talking
to ghosts," he said. "You can't tell if
you're making up their answers or if they
are really talking to you."
"I say we make a list," Takumi said,
steering clear of introspective talk.
"What kind of proof do we have of
suicide?" The Colonel pulled out his
omnipresent notebook.
"She never hit the brakes," I said,
and the Colonel started scribbling.
And she was awfully upset about
something, although she'd been awfully
upset without committing suicide many
times before. We considered that maybe
the flowers were some kind of memorial
to herself — like a funeral arrangement
or something. But that didn't seem very
Alaskan to us. She was cryptic, sure, but
if you're going to plan your suicide down
to the flowers, you probably have a plan
as to how you're actually going to die,
and Alaska had no way of knowing a
police car was going to present itself on
I-65 for the occasion.
And the evidence suggesting an
accident?
"She was really drunk, so she could
have thought she wasn't going to hit the
cop, although I don't know how," Takumi
said. "She could have fallen asleep," Lara
offered.
"Yeah, we've thought about that," I
said. "But I don't think you keep driving
straight if you fall asleep."
"I can't think of a way to find out that
does not put our lives in considerable
danger," the Colonel deadpanned.
"Anyway, she didn't show warning
signs of suicide. I mean, she didn't talk
about wanting to die or give away her
stuff or anything."
"That's two. Drunk and no plans to
die," Takumi said. This wasn't going
anywhere. Just a different dance with the
same question. What we needed wasn't
more thinking. We needed more
evidence.
"We have to find out where she was
going," the Colonel said.
"The last people she talked to were
me, you, and Jake," I said to him. "And
we don't know. So how the hell are we
going to find out?"
Takumi looked over at the Colonel
and sighed. "I don't think it would help,
to know where she was going. I think
that would make it worse for us. Just a
gut feeling."
"Well, my gut wants to know," Lara
said, and only then did I realize what
Takumi meant the day we'd showered
together — I may have kissed her, but I
r e a l l y didn't have a monopoly on
Alaska; the Colonel and I weren't the
only ones who cared about her, and
weren't alone in trying to figure out how
she died and why.
"Well, regardless," said the Colonel,
"we're at a dead end. So one of you think
of something to do. Because I'm out of
investigative tools."
He flicked his cigarette butt into the
creek, stood up, and left. We followed
him. Even in defeat, he was still the
Colonel.
fifty-one days after
The investigation stalled,I took to
reading for religion class again, which
seemed to please the Old Man, whose
pop quizzes I'd been failing consistently
for a solid six weeks. We had one that
Wednesday morning: Share an example
of a Buddhist koan. A koan is like a
riddle that's supposed to help you
toward enlightenment in Zen Buddhism.
For my answer, I wrote about this guy
Banzan. He was walking through the
market one day when he overheard
someone ask a butcher for his best piece
of meat. The butcher answered,
"Everything in my shop is the best. You
cannot find a piece of meat that is not the
best." Upon hearing this, Banzan
realized that there is no best and no
worst, that those judgments have no real
meaning because there is only what is,
a n d p o o f , he reached enlightenment.
Reading it the night before, I'd wondered
if it would be like that for me — if in
one moment, I would finally understand
her, know her, and understand the role
I'd played in her dying. But I wasn't
convinced enlightenment struck like
lightning.
After we'd passed our quizzes, the
Old Man, sitting, grabbed his cane and
motioned toward Alaska's fading
question on the blackboard. "Let's look
at one sentence on page ninety-four of
this very entertaining introduction to Zen
that I had you read this week.
'Everything that comes together falls
apart,'" the Old Man said. "Everything.
The chair I'm sitting on. It was built,
and so it will fall apart. I'm gonna fall
apart, probably before this chair. And
you're gonna fall apart. The cells and
organs and systems that make you you —
they came together, grew together, and
so must fall apart. The Buddha knew one
thing science didn't prove for millennia
after his death: Entropy increases.
Things fall apart."
We are all going,I thought, and it
applies to turtles and turtlenecks, Alaska
the girl and Alaska the place, because
nothing can last, not even the earth itself.
The Buddha said that suffering was
caused by desire, we'd learned, and that
the cessation of desire meant the
cessation of suffering. When you stopped
wishing things wouldn't fall apart, you'd
stop suffering when they did.
Someday no one will remember that
she ever existed,I wrote in my notebook,
and then, or that I did. Because
memories fall apart, too. And then you're
left with nothing, left not even with a
ghost but with its shadow. In the
beginning, she had haunted me, haunted
my dreams, but even now, just weeks
later, she was slipping away, falling
apart in my memory and everyone else's,
dying again.
The Colonel, who had driven the
Investigation from the start, who had
cared about what happened to her when I
only cared if she loved me, had given up
on it, answerless. And I didn't like what
answers I had: She hadn't even cared
enough about what happened between us
to tell Jake; instead, she had just talked
cute with him, giving him no reason to
think that minutes before, I'd tasted her
boozy breath. And then something
invisible snapped inside her, and that
which had come together commenced to
fall apart.
And maybe that was the only answer
we'd ever have. She fell apart because
that's what happens. The Colonel
seemed resigned to that, but if the
Investigation had once been his idea, it
was now the thing that held me together,
and I still hoped for enlightenment.
sixty-two days after
The next Sunday,I slept in until the
late-morning sunlight slivered through
the blinds and found its way to my face. I
pulled the comforter over my head, but
the air got hot and stale, so I got up to
call my parents.
"Miles!" my mom said before I even
said hello. "We just got caller
identification."
"Does it magically know it's me
calling from the pay phone?"
She laughed. "No, it just says *pay
phone' and the area code. So I deduced.
How are you?" she asked, a warm
concern in her voice.
"I'm doing okay. I kinda screwed up
some of my classes for a while, but I'm
back to studying now, so it should be
fine," I said, and that was mostly true.
"I know it's been hard on you,
buddy," she said. "Oh! Guess who your
dad and I saw at a party last night? Mrs.
Forrester. Your fourth-grade teacher!
Remember? She remembered you
perfectly, and spoke very highly of you,
and we just talked" — and while I was
pleased to know that Mrs. Forrester held
my fourth-grade self in high regard, I
only half listened as I read the scribbled
notes on the white-painted pine wall on
either side of the phone, looking for any
new ones I might be able to decode
(Lacy's — Friday, 10 were the when
and where of a Weekday Warrior party,
I figured)—"and we had dinner with the
Johnstons last night and I'm afraid that
Dad had too much wine. We played
charades and he was just awful." She
laughed, and I felt so tired, but someone
had dragged the bench away from the
pay phone, so I sat my bony butt down
on the hard concrete, pulling the silver
cord of the phone taut and preparing for
a serious soliloquy from my mom, and
then down below all the other notes and
scribbles, I saw a drawing of a flower.
Twelve oblong petals around a filled-in
circle against the daisy-white paint, and
daisies, white daisies, and I could hear
her saying, What do you see, Pudge?
Look, and I could see her sitting drunk
on the phone with Jake talking about
nothing and What are you doing? and
she says, Nothing, just doodling, just
doodling. And then, Oh God.
"Miles?"
"Yeah, sorry, Mom. Sorry. Chip's
here. We gotta go study. I gotta go."
"Will you call us later, then? I'm sure
Dad wants to talk to you."
"Yeah, Mom; yeah, of course. I love
you, okay? Okay, I gotta go."
"I think I found something!" I shouted
at the Colonel, invisible beneath his
blanket, but the urgency in my voice and
the promise of something, anything,
found, woke the Colonel up instantly,
and he jumped from his bunk to the
linoleum. Before I could say anything, he
grabbed yesterday's jeans and sweatshirt
from the floor, pulled them on, and
followed me outside.
"Look." I pointed, and he squatted
down beside the phone and said, "Yeah.
She drew that. She was always doodling
those flowers."
"And 'just doodling,' remember?
Jake asked her what she was doing and
she said 'just doodling,' and then she
said 'Oh God' and freaked out. She
looked at the doodle and remembered
something."
"Good memory, Pudge," he
acknowledged, and I wondered why the
Colonel wouldn't just get excited about
it.
"And then she freaked out," I
repeated, "and went and got the tulips
while we were getting the fireworks.
She saw the doodle, remembered
whatever she'd forgotten, and then
freaked out."
"Maybe," he said, still staring at the
flower, trying perhaps to see it as she
had. He stood up finally and said, "It's a
solid theory, Pudge," and reached up and
patted my shoulder, like a coach
complimenting a player. "But we still
don't know what she forgot."
sixty-nine days after
A week after the discovery of the
doodled flower, I'd resigned myself to
its insignificance — I wasn't Banzan in
the meat market after all — and as the
maples around campus began to hint of
resurrection and the maintenance crew
began mowing the grass in the dorm
circle again, it seemed to me we had
finally lost her.
The Colonel and I walked into the
woods down by the lake that afternoon
and smoked a cigarette in the precise
spot where the Eagle had caught us so
many months before. We'd just come
from a town meeting, where the Eagle
announced the school was going to build
a playground by the lake in memory of
Alaska. She did like swings, I guess, but
a playground? Lara stood up at the
meeting — surely a first for her — and
said they should do something funnier,
something Alaska herself would have
done. Now, by the lake, sitting on a mossy,
half-rotten log, the Colonel said to me,
"Lara was right. We should do
something for her. A prank. Something
she would have loved."
"Like, a memorial prank?"
"Exactly. The Alaska Young
Memorial Prank. We can make it an
annual event. Anyway, she came up with
this idea last year. But she wanted to
save it to be our senior prank. But it's
good. It's really good. It's historic."
"Are you going to tell me?" I asked,
thinking back to the time when he and
Alaska had left me out of prank planning
for Barn Night.
"Sure," he said. "The prank is
entitled 'Subverting the Patriarchal
Paradigm.'" And he told me, and I have
to say, Alaska left us with the crown
jewel of pranks, the Mona Lisa of highschool
hilarity, the culmination of
generations of Culver Creek pranking.
And if the Colonel could pull it off, it
would be etched in the memory of
everyone at the Creek, and Alaska
deserved nothing less. Best of all, it did
not, technically, involve any expellable
offenses.
The Colonel got up and dusted the
dirt and moss off his pants. "I think we
owe her that."
And I agreed, but still, she owed us
an explanation. If she was up there,
down there, out there, somewhere,
maybe she would laugh. And maybe —
just maybe — she would give us the clue
we needed.
eighty-three days after
Two weeks later,the Colonel
returned from spring break with two
notebooks filled with the minutiae of
prank planning, sketches of various
locations, and a forty-page, two-column
list of problems that might crop up and
their solutions. He calculated all times
to a tenth of a second, and all distances
to the inch, and then he recalculated, as
if he could not bear the thought of failing
her again. And then on that Sunday, the
Colonel woke up late and rolled over. I
was reading The Sound and the Fury,
which I was supposed to have read in
mid-February, and I looked up as I heard
the rustling in the bed, and the Colonel
said, "Let's get the band back together."
And so I ventured out into the overcast
spring and woke up Lara and Takumi,
then brought them back to Room 43. The
Barn Night crew was intact — or as
close as it ever would be — for the
Alaska Young Memorial Prank.
The three of us sat on the couch
while the Colonel stood in front of us,
outlining the plan and our parts in it with
an excitement I hadn't seen in him since
Before. When he finished, he asked,
"Any questions?"
"Yeah," Takumi said. "Is that
seriously going to work?"
"Well, first we gotta find a stripper.
And second Pudge has to work some
magic with his dad."
"All right, then," Takumi said. "Let's
get to work."
eighty-four days after
Every spring,Culver Creek took one
Friday afternoon off from classes, and
all the students, faculty, and staff were
required to go to the gym for Speaker
Day. Speaker Day featured two speakers
— usually small-time celebrities or
small-time politicians or small-time
academics, the kind of people who
would come and speak at a school for
the measly three hundred bucks the
school budgeted. The junior class picked
the first speaker and the seniors the
second, and anyone who had ever
attended a Speaker Day agreed that they
were torturously boring. We planned to
shake Speaker Day up a bit.
All we needed to do was convince
the Eagle to let "Dr. William Morse," a
"friend of my dad's" and a "preeminent
scholar of deviant sexuality in
adolescents," be the junior class's
speaker.
So I called my dad at work, and his
secretary, Paul, asked me if everything
was all right, and I wondered why
e ve r yone , e v e r y one , asked me if
everything was all right when I called at
any time other than Sunday morning.
"Yeah, I'm fine."
My dad picked up. "Hey, Miles. Is
everything all right?"
I laughed and spoke quietly into the
phone, since people were milling about.
"Yeah, Dad. Everything is fine. Hey,
remember when you stole the school bell
and buried it in the cemetery?"
"Greatest Culver Creek prank ever,"
he responded proudly.
"It was, Dad. It was . So listen, I
wonder if you'd help out with the new
greatest Culver Creek prank ever."
"Oh, I don't know about that, Miles. I
don't want you getting in any trouble."
"Well, I won't. The whole junior
class is planning it. And it's not like
anyone is going to get hurt or anything.
Because, well, remember Speaker
Day?"
"God that was boring. That was
almost worse than class."
"Yeah, well, I need you to pretend to
be our speaker. Dr. William Morse, a
professor of psychology at the
University of Central Florida and an
expert in adolescent understandings of
sexuality."
He was quiet for a long time, and I
looked down at Alaska's last daisy and
waited for him to ask what the prank
was, and I would have told him, but I
just heard him breathe slowly into the
phone, and then he said, "I won't even
ask. Hmm." He sighed. "Swear to God
you'll never tell your mother."
"I swear to God." I paused. It took
me a second to remember the Eagle's
real name. "Mr. Starnes is going to call
you in about ten minutes."
"Okay, my name is Dr. William
Morse, and I'm a psychology professor,
and — adolescent sexuality?"
"Yup. You're the best, Dad."
"I just want to see if you can top
me," he said, laughing.
Although it killed the Colonel to do
it, the prank could not work without the
assistance of the Weekday Warriors —
specifically junior-class president
Longwell Chase, who by now had grown
his silly surfer mop back. But the
Warriors loved the idea, so I met
Longwell in his room and said, "Let's
go."
Longwell Chase and I had nothing to
talk about and no desire to pretend
otherwise, so we walked silently to the
Eagle's house. The Eagle came to the
door before we even knocked. He
cocked his head a little when he saw us,
looking confused — and, indeed, we
made an odd couple, with Long well's
pressed and pleated khaki pants and my
I-keep-meaning-to-do-laundry blue
jeans.
"The speaker we picked is a friend
of Miles's dad," Longwell said. "Dr.
William Morse. He's a professor at a
university down in Florida, and he
studies adolescent sexuality."
"Aiming for controversy, are we?"
"Oh no," I said. "I've met Dr. Morse.
He's interesting, but he's not
controversial. He just studies the, uh, the
way that adolescents' understanding of
sex is still changing and growing. I
mean, he's opposed to premarital sex."
"Well. What's his phone number?" I
gave the Eagle a piece of paper, and he
walked to a phone on the wall and
dialed. "Yes, hello. I'm calling to speak
with Dr. Morse?…Okay, thanks…Hello,
Dr. Morse. I have Miles Halter here in
my home, and he tells me…great,
wonderful…Well, I was wondering" —
the Eagle paused, twisting the cord
around his finger—"wondering, I guess,
whether you — just so long as you
understand that these are impressionable
young people. We wouldn't want
explicit discussions…. Excellent.
Excellent. I'm glad you understand….
You, too, sir. See you soon!" The Eagle
hung up the phone, smiling, and said,
"Good choice! He seems like a very
interesting man."
"Oh yeah," Longwell said very
seriously. "I think he will be
extraordinarily interesting."
one hundred two days
after
My father played Dr. William Morse
on the phone, but the man playing him in
real life went by the name of Maxx with
two x's, except that his name was
actually Stan, except on Speaker Day his
name was, obviously, Dr. William
Morse. He was a veritable existential
identity crisis, a male stripper with more
aliases than a covert CIA agent.
The first four "agencies" the Colonel
called turned us down. It wasn't until we
got to the B's in the "Entertainment"
section of the Yellow Pages that we
found Bachelorette Parties R Us. The
owner of the aforementioned
establishment liked the idea a great deal,
but, he said, "Maxx is gonna love that.
But no nudity.
Not in front of the kids." We agreed
— with some reluctance.
To ensure that none of us would get
expelled, Takumi and I collected five
dollars from every junior at Culver
Creek to cover "Dr. William Morse's"
appearance fee, since we doubted the
Eagle would be keen on paying him after
witnessing the, uh, speech. I paid the
Colonel's five bucks. "I feel that I have
earned your charity," he said, gesturing
to the spiral notebooks he'd filled with
plans.
As I sat through my classes that
morning, I could think of nothing else.
Every junior in the school had known for
two weeks, and so far not even the
faintest rumor had leaked out. But the
Creek was rife with gossipsparticularly
the Weekday Warriors, and if just one
person told one friend who told one
friend who told one friend who told the
Eagle, everything would fall apart.
The Creek's don't-rat ethos
withstood the test nicely, but when
Maxx/Stan/Dr. Morse didn't shown up
by 11:50 that morning, I thought the
Colonel would lose his shit. He sat on
the bumper of a car in the student
parking lot, his head bowed, his hands
running through his thick mop of dark
hair over and over again, as if he were
trying to find something in there. Maxx
had promised to arrive by 11:40, twenty
minutes before the official start of
Speaker Day, giving him time to learn
the speech and everything. I stood next to
the Colonel, worried but quiet, waiting.
We'd sent Takumi to call "the
agency" and learn the whereabouts of
"the performer."
"Of all the things I thought could go
wrong, this was not one of them. We
have no solution for this."
Takumi ran up, careful not to speak
to us until he was near. Kids were
starting to file into the gym. Late late late
late. We asked so little of our performer,
really. We had written his speech. We
had planned everything for him.
All Maxx had to do was show up
with his outfit on. And yet…
"The agency," said Takumi, "says the
performer is on his way."
"On his way?" the Colonel said,
clawing at his hair with a new vigor.
"On his way? He's already late."
"They said he should be—" and then
suddenly our worries disappeared as a
blue minivan rounded the corner toward
the parking lot, and I saw a man inside
wearing a suit.
"That'd better be Maxx," the Colonel
said as the car parked. He jogged up to
the front door.
"I'm Maxx," the guy said upon
opening the door.
"I am a nameless and faceless
representative of the junior class," the
Colonel answered, shaking Maxx's hand.
He was thirtyish, tan and wideshouldered,
with a strong jaw and a
dark, close-cropped goatee.
We gave Maxx a copy of his speech,
and he read through it quickly.
"Any questions?" I asked.
"Uh, yeah. Given the nature of this
event, I think y'all should pay me in
advance."
He struck me as very articulate, even
professorial, and I felt a supreme
confidence, as if Alaska had found the
best male stripper in central Alabama
and led us right to him.
Takumi popped the trunk of his SUV
and grabbed a paper grocery bag with
$320 in it. "Here you go, Maxx," he said.
"Okay, Pudge here is going to sit down
there with you, because you are friends
with Pudge's dad. That's in the speech.
But, uh, we're hoping that if you get
interrogated when this is all over, you
can find it in your heart to say that the
whole junior class called on a
conference call to hire you, because we
wouldn't want Pudge here to get in any
trouble."
He laughed. "Sounds good to me. I
took this gig because I thought it was
hilarious. Wish I'd thought of this in high
school."
As I walked into the gym, Maxx/Dr.
William Morse at my side, Takumi and
the Colonel trailing a good bit behind
me, I knew I was more likely to get
busted than anyone else. But I'd been
reading the Culver Creek Handbook
pretty closely the last couple weeks, and
I reminded myself of my two-pronged
defense, in the event I got in trouble: 1.
There is not, technically, a rule against
paying a stripper to dance in front of the
school. 2. It cannot be proven that I was
responsible for the incident. It can only
be proven that I brought a person onto
campus who I presumed to be an expert
on sexual deviancy in adolescence and
who turned out to be an actual sexual
deviant.
I sat down with Dr. William Morse
in the middle of the front row of
bleachers. Some ninth graders sat behind
me, but when the Colonel walked up
with Lara a moment later, he politely
told them, "Thanks for holding our
seats," and ushered them away. As per
the plan, Takumi was in the supply room
on the second floor, connecting his
stereo equipment to the gym's
loudspeakers. I turned to Dr. Morse and
said, "We should look at each other with
great interest and talk like you're friends
with my parents."
He smiled and nodded his head. "He
is a great man, your father. And your
mother — so beautiful." I rolled my
eyes, a bit disgusted. Still, I liked this
stripper fellow. The Eagle came in at
noon on the nose, greeted the seniorclass
speaker — a former Alabama state
attorney general — and then came over
to Dr. Morse, who stood with great
aplomb and half bowed as he shook the
Eagle's hand — maybe too formal —
and the Eagle said, "We're certainly very
glad to have you here," and Maxx
replied, "Thank you. I hope I don't
disappoint."
I wasn't worried about getting
expelled. I wasn't even worried about
getting the Colonel expelled, although
maybe I should have been. I was
worried that it wouldn't work because
Alaska hadn't planned it. Maybe no
prank worthy of her could be pulled off
without her.
The Eagle stood behind the podium.
"This is a day of historic
significance at Culver Creek. It was the
vision of our founder Phillip Garden that
you, as students and we, as faculty, might
take one afternoon a year to benefit from
the wisdom of voices outside the school,
and so we meet here annually to learn
from them, to see the world as others see
it. Today, our junior-class speaker is Dr.
William Morse, a professor of
psychology at the University of Central
Florida and a widely respected scholar.
He is here today to talk about teenagers
and sexuality, a topic I'm sure you'll find
considerably interesting. So please help
me welcome Dr. Morse to the podium."
We applauded. My heart beat in my
chest like it wanted to applaud, too. As
Maxx walked up to the podium, Lara
leaned down to me and whispered, "He
ees really hot."
"Thank you, Mr. Starnes." Maxx
smiled and nodded to the Eagle, then
straightened his papers and placed them
on the podium. Even I almost believed
he was a professor of psychology. I
wondered if maybe he was an actor
supplementing his income.
He read directly from the speech
without looking up, but he read with the
confident, airy tone of a slightly snooty
academic. "I'm here today to talk with
you about the fascinating subject of
teenage sexuality. My research is in the
field of sexual linguistics, specifically
the way that young people discuss sex
and related questions. So, for instance,
I'm interested in why my saying the word
arm might not make you laugh, but my
saying the word vagina might." And,
indeed, there were some nervous
twitters from the audience. "The way
young people speak about one another's
bodies says a great deal about our
society. In today's world, boys are much
more likely to objectify girls' bodies
than the other way around. Boys will say
amongst themselves that so-and-so has a
nice rack, while girls will more likely
say that a boy is cute, a term that
describes both physical and emotional
characteristics. This has the effect of
turning girls into mere objects, while
boys are seen by girls as whole people
—" And then Lara stood up, and in her
delicate, innocent accent, cut Dr.
William Morse off. "You're so hot! I
weesh you'd shut up and take off your
clothes."
The students laughed, but all of the
teachers turned around and looked at
her, stunned silent. She sat down.
"What's your name, dear?"
"Lara," she said.
"Now, Lara," Maxx said, looking
down at his paper to remember the line,
"what we have here is a very interesting
case study — a female objectifying me,
a male. It's so unusual that I can only
assume you're making an attempt at
humor."
Lara stood up again and shouted,
"I'm not keeding! Take off your clothes."
He nervously looked down at the
paper, and then looked up at all of us,
smiling. "Well, it is certainly important
to subvert the patriarchal paradigm, and
I suppose this is a way. All right, then,"
he said, stepping to the left of the
podium. And then he shouted, loud
enough that Takumi could hear him
upstairs, "This one's for Alaska Young."
As the fast, pumping bass of Prince's
"Get Off" started from the loudspeakers,
Dr. William Morse grabbed the leg of
his pants with one hand and the lapel of
his coat with the other, and the Velcro
parted and his stage costume came apart,
revealing Maxx with two x's, a
stunningly muscular man with an eightpack
in his stomach and bulging pec
muscles, and Maxx stood before us,
smiling, wearing only briefs that were
surely tighty, but not whitey — black
leather.
His feet in place, Maxx swayed his
arms to the music, and the crowd erupted
with laughter and deafening, sustained
applause — the largest ovation by a
good measure in Speaker Day history.
The Eagle was up in a flash, and as soon
as he stood, Maxx stopped dancing, but
he flexed his pec muscles so that they
jumped up and down quickly in time to
the music before the Eagle, not smiling
but sucking his lips in as if not smiling
required effort, indicated with a thumb
that Maxx should go on home, and Maxx
did.
My eyes followed Maxx out the
door, and I saw Takumi standing in the
doorway, fists raised in the air in
triumph, before he ran back upstairs to
cut the music. I was glad he'd gotten to
see at least a bit of the show.
Takumi had plenty of time to get his
equipment out, because the laughing and
talking went on for several minutes
while the Eagle kept repeating, "Okay.
Okay. Let's settle down now. Settle
down, y'all. Let's settle down."
The senior-class speaker spoke next.
He blew. And as we left the gym,
nonjuniors crowded around us, asking,
"Was it you?" and I just smiled and said
no, for it had not been me, or the Colonel
or Takumi or Lara or Longwell Chase or
anyone else in that gym. It had been
Alaska's prank through and through. The
hardest part about pranking, Alaska told
me once, is not being able to confess.
But I could confess on her behalf now.
And as I slowly made my way out of the
gym, I told anyone who would listen,
"No. It wasn't us. It was Alaska."
The four of us returned to Room 43,
aglow in the success of it, convinced that
the Creek would never again see such a
prank, and it didn't even occur to me that
I might get in trouble until the Eagle
opened the door to our room and stood
above us, and shook his head
disdainfully.
"I know it was y'all," said the Eagle.
We look at him silently. He often
bluffed. Maybe he was bluffing.
"Don't ever do anything like that
again," he said. "But, Lord, 'subverting
the patriarchal paradigm'—it's like she
wrote the speech." He smiled and closed
the door.
one hundred fourteen
days after
A week and Ahalf later,I walked
back from my afternoon classes, the sun
bearing down on my skin in a constant
reminder that spring in Alabama had
come and gone in a matter of hours, and
now, early May, summer had returned
for a six-month visit, and I felt the sweat
dribble down my back and longed for
the bitter winds of January. When I got
to my room, I found Takumi sitting on the
couch, reading my biography of Tolstoy.
"Uh, hi," I said.
He closed the book and placed it
beside him and said, "January10."
"What?" I asked.
"January 10. That date ring a bell?"
"Yeah, it's the day Alaska died."
Technically, she died three hours into
January 11, but it was still, to us
anyway, Monday night, January 10.
"Yeah, but something else, Pudge.
January 9. Alaska's mom took her to the
zoo."
"Wait. No. How do you know that?"
"She told us at Barn Night.
Remember?"
Of course I didn't remember. If I
could remember numbers, I wouldn't be
struggling toward a C-plus in precalc.
"Holy shit," I said as the Colonel
walked in.
"What?" the Colonel asked.
"January 9, 1997," I told him.
"Alaska liked the bears. Her mom liked
the monkeys." The Colonel looked at me
blankly for a moment and then took his
backpack off and slung it across the
room in a single motion.
"Holy shit," he said. "WHY THE
HELL DIDN'T I THINK OF THAT!"
Within a minute, the Colonel had the
best solution either of us would ever
come up with. "Okay. She's sleeping.
Jake calls, and she talks to him, and
she's doodling, and she looks at her
white flower, and 'Oh God my mom
liked white flowers and put them in my
hair when I was little,' and then she flips
out. She comes back into her room and
starts screaming at us that she forgot —
forgot about her mom, of course — so
she takes the flowers, drives off campus,
on her way to — what?" He looked at
me. "What? Her mom's grave?"
And I said, "Yeah, probably. Yeah.
So she gets into the car, and she just
wants to get to her mom's grave, but
there's this jackknifed truck and the cops
there, and she's drunk and pissed off and
she's in a hurry, so she thinks she can
squeeze past the cop car, and she's not
even thinking straight, but she has to get
to her mom, and she thinks she can get
past it somehow and POOF."
Takumi nods slowly, thinking, and
then says, "Or, she gets into the car with
the flowers. But she's already missed the
anniversary. She's probably thinking that
she screwed things up with her mom
again — first she doesn't call 911, and
now she can't even remember the
freaking anniversary. And she's furious
and she hates herself, and she decides,
'That's it, I'm doing it,' and she sees the
cop car and there's her chance and she
just floors it."
The Colonel reached into his pocket
and pulled out a pack of cigarettes,
tapping it upside down against thecoffee
table. "Well," he said. "That clears
things up nicely."
one hundred eighteen
days after
So we gave up. I'd finally had
enough of chasing after a ghost who did
not want to be discovered. We'd failed,
maybe, but some mysteries aren't meant
to be solved. I still did not know her as I
wanted to, but I never could.
She made it impossible for me. And
the accicide, the suident, would never be
anything else, and I was left to ask, Did I
help you toward a fate you didn't want,
Alaska, or did I just assist in your
willful self-destruction?
Because they are different crimes,
and I didn't know whether to feel angry
at her for making me part of her suicide
or just to feel angry at myself for letting
her go.
But we knew what could be found
out, and in finding it out, she had made
us closer — the Colonel and Takumi and
me, anyway. And that was it. She didn't
leave me enough to discover her, but she
left me enough to rediscover the Great
Perhaps.
"There's one more thing we should
do," the Colonel said as we played a
video game together with the sound
onjust the two of us, like in the first days
of the Investigation.
"There's nothing more we can do."
"I want to drive through it," he said.
"Like she did."
We couldn't risk leaving campus in
the middle of the night like she had, so
we left about twelve hours earlier, at
3:00 in the afternoon, with the Colonel
behind the wheel of Takumi's SUV. We
asked Lara and Takumi to come along,
but they were tired of chasing ghosts,
and besides, finals were coming.
It was a bright afternoon, and the sun
bore down on the asphalt so that the
ribbon of road before us quivered with
heat. We drove a mile down Highway
119 and then merged onto I-65
northbound, heading toward the accident
scene and Vine Station.
The Colonel drove fast, and we
were quiet, staring straight ahead. I tried
to imagine what she might have been
thinking, trying again to see through time
and space, to get inside her head just for
a moment. An ambulance, lights and
sirens blaring, sped past us, going in the
opposite direction, toward school, and
for an instant, I felt a nervous excitement
and thought, It could be someone I
know. I almost wished it was someone I
knew, to give new form and depth to the
sadness I still felt.
The silence broke: "Sometimes I
liked it," I said. "Sometimes I liked it
that she was dead."
"You mean it felt good?"
"No. I don't know. It felt..pure."
"Yeah," he said, dropping his usual
eloquence. "Yeah. I know. Me, too. It's
natural. I mean, it must be natural."
It always shocked me when I
realized that I wasn't the only person in
the world who thought and felt such
strange and awful things.
Five miles north of school, the
Colonel moved into the left lane of the
interstate and began to accelerate. I
gritted my teeth, and then before us,
broken glass glittered in the blare of the
sun like the road was wearing jewelry,
and that spot must be the spot. He was
still accelerating.
I thought: This would not be a bad
way to go.
I thought: Straight and fast Maybe
she just decided at the last second.
A n d POOF we are through the
moment of her death. We are driving
through the place that she could not drive
through, passing onto asphalt she never
saw, and we are not dead. We are not
dead! We are breathing and we are
crying and now slowing down and
moving back into the right lane.
We got off at the next exit, quietly,
and, switching drivers, we walked in
front of the car. We met and I held him,
my hands balled into tight fists around
his shoulders, and he wrapped his short
arms around me and squeezed tight, so
that I felt the heaves of his chest as we
realized over and over again that we
were still alive. I realized it in waves
and we held on to each other crying and
I thought, God we must look so lame, but
it doesn't much matter when you have
just now realized, all the time later, that
you are still alive.
one hundred nineteen
days after
The colonel and I threw ourselves
into school once we gave up, knowing
that we'd both need to ace our finals to
achieve our GPA goals (I wanted a 3.0
and the Colonel wouldn't settle for even
a 3.98). Our room became Study Central
for the four of us, with Takumi and Lara
over till all hours of the night talking
about The Sound and the Fury and
meiosis and the Battle of the Bulge. The
Colonel taught us a semester's worth of
precalc, although he was too good at
math to teach it very well—"Of course it
makes sense. Just trust me. Christ, it's
not that hard" — and I missed Alaska.
And when I could not catch up, I
cheated. Takumi and I shared copies of
Cliffs Notes for Things Fall Apart and A
Farewell to Arms ("These things are just
too damned long\" he exclaimed at one
point).
We didn't talk much. But we didn't
need to.
one hundred twenty-two
days after
A cool breeze had beaten back the
onslaught of summer, and on the morning
the Old Man gave us our final exams, he
suggested we have class outside. I
wondered why we could have an entire
class outside when I'd been kicked out
of class last semester for merely
glancing outside, but the Old Man
wanted to have class outside, so we did.
The Old Man sat in a chair that
Kevin Richman carried out for him, and
we sat on the grass, my notebook at first
perched awkwardly in my lap and then
against the thick green grass, and the
bumpy ground did not lend itself to
writing, and the gnats hovered. We were
too close to the lake for comfortable
sitting, really, but the Old Man seemed
happy.
"I have here your final exam. Last
semester, I gave you nearly two months
to complete your final paper. This time,
you get two weeks." He paused. "Well,
nothing to be done about that, I guess."
He laughed. "To be honest, I just
decided once and for all to use this
paper topic last night. It rather goes
against my nature. Anyway, pass these
around." When the pile came to me, I
read the question: How will you — you
personally — ever get out of this
labyrinth of suffering? Now that you've
wrestled with three major religious
traditions, apply your newly enlightened
mind to Alaska's question.
After the exams had been passed out,
the Old Man said, "You need not
specifically discuss the perspectives of
different religions in your essay, so no
research is necessary. Your knowledge,
or lack thereof, has been established in
the quizzes you've taken this semester. I
am interested in how you are able to fit
the uncontestable fact of suffering into
your understanding of the world, and
how you hope to navigate through life in
spite of it.
"Next year, assuming my lungs hold
out, we'll study Taoism, Hinduism, and
Judaism together—" The Old Man
coughed and then started to laugh, which
caused him to cough again. "Lord, maybe
I won't last. But about the three
traditions we've studied this year, I'd
like to say one thing. Islam, Christianity,
and Buddhism each have founder figures
— Muhammad, Jesus, and the Buddha,
respectively. And in thinking about these
founder figures, I believe we must
finally conclude that each brought a
message of radical hope. To seventhcentury
Arabia, Muhammad brought the
promise that anyone could find
fulfillment and everlasting life through
allegiance to the one true God. The
Buddha held out hope that suffering
could be transcended. Jesus brought the
message that the last shall be first, that
even the tax collectors and lepers — the
outcasts — had cause for hope. And so
that is the question I leave you with in
this final: What is your cause for hope?"
Back at Room 43, the Colonel was
smoking in the room. Even though I still
had one evening left of washing dishes
in the cafeteria to work off my smoking
conviction, we didn't much fear the
Eagle. We had fifteen days left, and if
we got caught, we'd just have to start
senior year with some work hours. "So
how will we ever get out of this
labyrinth, Colonel?" I asked.
"If only I knew," he said.
"That's probably not gonna get you
an A."
"Also it doesn't do much to put my
soul to rest."
"Or hers," I said.
"Right. I'd forgotten about her." He
shook his head. "That keeps happening."
"Well, you have to write
something," I argued.
"After all this time, it still seems to
me like straight and fast is the only way
out — but I choose the labyrinth. The
labyrinth blows, but I choose it."
one hundred thirty-six
days after
Two weeks later,I still hadn't
finished my final for the Old Man, and
the semester was just twenty-four hours
from ending. I was walking home from
my final test, a difficult but ultimately (I
hoped) successful battle with
precalculus that would win me the Bminus
I so richly desired. It was
genuinely hot out again, warm like she
was. And I felt okay. Tomorrow, my
parents would come and load up my
stuff, and we'd watch graduation and
then go back to Florida. The Colonel
was going home to his mother to spend
the summer watching the soybeans grow,
but I could call him long-distance, so
we'd be in touch plenty. Takumi was
going to Japan for the summer, and Lara
was again to be driven home via green
limo. I was just thinking that it was all
right not to know quite where Alaska
was and quite where she was going that
night, when I opened the door to my
room and noticed a folded slip of paper
on the linoleum floor. It was a single
piece of lime green stationery. At the
top, it read in calligraphy: From the
Desk of..Takumi Hikohito
Pudge/Colonel: I am sorry that I have
not talked to you before. I am not
staying for graduation. I leave for
Japan tomorrow morning. For a long
time, I was mad at you. The way you cut
me out of everything hurt me, and so I
kept what I knew to myself. But then
even after I wasn't mad anymore, I still
didn't say anything, and I don't even
really know why. Pudge had that kiss, I
guess. And I had this secret.
You've mostly figured this out, but
the truth is that I saw her that night. I'd
stayed up late with Lara and some
people, and then I was falling asleep
and I heard her crying outside my back
window. It was like 3:15 that morning,
maybe, and I walked out there and saw
her walking through the soccer field. I
tried to talk to her, but she was in a
hurry. She told me that her mother was
dead eight years that day, and that she
always put flowers on her mother's
grave on the anniversary, but she
forgot that year. She was out there
looking for flowers, but it was too early
— too wintry. That's how I knew about
January 10. I still have no idea whether
it was suicide.
She was so sad, and I didn't know
what to say or do. I think she counted
on me to be the one person who would
always say and do the right things to
help her, but I couldn't. I just thought
she was looking for flowers. I didn't
know she was going to go. She was
drunk, just trashed drunk, and I really
didn't think she would drive or
anything. I thought she would just cry
herself to sleep and then drive to visit
her mom the next day or something.
She walked away, and then I heard
a car start. I don't know what I was
thinking.
So I let her go, too. And I'm sorry. I
know you loved her. It was hard not to.
Takumi I ran out of the room, like I'd
never smoked a cigarette, like I ran with
Takumi on Barn Night, across the dorm
circle to his room, but Takumi was gone.
His bunk was bare vinyl; his desk empty;
an outline of dust where his stereo had
been. He was gone, and I did not have
time to tell him what I had just now
realized: that I forgave him, and that she
forgave us, and that we had to forgive to
survive in the labyrinth. There were so
many of us who would have to live with
things done and things left undone that
day. Things that did not go right, things
that seemed okay at the time because we
could not see the future. If only we could
see the endless string of consequences
that result from our smallest actions. But
we can't know better until knowing
better is useless.
And as I walked back to give
Takumi's note to the Colonel, I saw that I
would never know. I would never know
her well enough to know her thoughts in
those last minutes, would never know if
she left us on purpose. But the notknowing
would not keep me from caring,
and I would always love Alaska Young,
my crooked neighbor, with all my
crooked heart.
I got back to Room 43, but the
Colonel wasn't home yet, so I left the
note on the top bunk and sat down at the
computer, and I wrote my way out of the
labyrinth: Before I got here, I thought for
a long time that the way out of the
labyrinth was to pretend that it did not
exist, to build a small, self-sufficient
world in a back corner of the endless
maze and to pretend that I was not lost,
but home. But that only led to a lonely
life accompanied only by the last words
of the already-dead, so I came here
looking for a Great Perhaps, for real
friends and a more-than-minor life. And
then I screwed up and the Colonel
screwed up and Takumi screwed up and
she slipped through our fingers. And
there's no sugarcoating it: She deserved
better friends.
When she fucked up, all those years
ago, just a little girl terrified into
paralysis, she collapsed into the enigma
of herself. And I could have done that,
but I saw where it led for her. So I still
believe in the Great Perhaps, and I can
believe in it in spite of having lost her.
Because I will forget her, yes. That
which came together will fall apart
imperceptibly slowly, and I will forget,
but she will forgive my forgetting, just as
I forgive her for forgetting me and the
Colonel and everyone but herself and
her mom in those last moments she spent
as a person. I know now that she
forgives me for being dumb and scared
and doing the dumb and scared thing. I
know she forgives me, just as her mother
forgives her. And here's how I know: I
thought at first that she was just dead.
Just darkness. Just a body being eaten by
bugs. I thought about her a lot like that,
as something's meal. What was her —
green eyes, half a smirk, the soft curves
of her legs — would soon be nothing,
just the bones I never saw. I thought
about the slow process of becoming
bone and then fossil and then coal that
will, in millions of years, be mined by
humans of the future, and how they
would heat their homes with her, and
then she would be smoke billowing out
of a smokestack, coating the atmosphere.
I still think that, sometimes, think that
maybe "the afterlife" is just something
we made up to ease the pain of loss, to
make our time in the labyrinth bearable.
Maybe she was just matter, and matter
gets recycled.
But ultimately I do not believe that
she was only matter. The rest of her must
be recycled, too. I believe now that we
are greater than the sum of our parts. If
you take Alaska's genetic code and you
add her life experiences and the
relationships she had with people, and
then you take the size and shape of her
body, you do not get her. There is
something else entirely. There is a part
of her greater than the sum of her
knowable parts. And that part has to go
somewhere, because it cannot be
destroyed.
Although no one will ever accuse me
of being much of a science student, one
thing I learned from science classes is
that energy is never created and never
destroyed. And if Alaska took her own
life, that is the hope I wish I could have
given her. Forgetting her mother, failing
her mother and her friends and herself
— those are awful things, but she did not
need to fold into herself and selfdestruct.
Those awful things are
survivable, because we are as
indestructible as we believe ourselves
to be. When adults say, "Teenagers think
they are invincible" with that sly, stupid
smile on their faces, they don't know
how right they are. We need never be
hopeless, because we can never be
irreparably broken. We think that we are
invincible because we are. We cannot
be born, and we cannot die.
Like all energy, we can only change
shapes and sizes and manifestations.
They forget that when they get old. They
get scared of losing and failing. But that
part of us greater than the sum of our
parts cannot begin and cannot end, and
so it cannot fail.
So I know she forgives me, just as I
forgive her. Thomas Edison's last words
were: "It's very beautiful over there."
I don't know where there is, but I
believe it's somewhere, and I hope it's
beautiful.