AT THE TIME I FIRST REALIZED I might be fictional, my weekdays were spent at a
publicly funded institution on the north side of Indianapolis called White River
High School, where I was required to eat lunch at a particular time—between
12:37 P.M. and 1:14 P.M.—by forces so much larger than myself that I couldn’t
even begin to identify them. If those forces had given me a different lunch
period, or if the tablemates who helped author my fate had chosen a different
topic of conversation that September day, I would’ve met a different end—or at
least a different middle. But I was beginning to learn that your life is a story told
about you, not one that you tell.
Of course, you pretend to be the author. You have to. You think, I now
choose to go to lunch, when that monotone beep rings from on high at 12:37.
But really, the bell decides. You think you’re the painter, but you’re the canvas.
Hundreds of voices were shouting over one another in the cafeteria, so that
the conversation became mere sound, the rushing of a river over rocks. And as I
sat beneath fluorescent cylinders spewing aggressively artificial light, I thought
about how we all believed ourselves to be the hero of some personal epic, when
in fact we were basically identical organisms colonizing a vast and windowless
room that smelled of Lysol and lard.
I was eating a peanut butter and honey sandwich and drinking a Dr Pepper.
To be honest, I find the whole process of masticating plants and animals and then
shoving them down my esophagus kind of disgusting, so I was trying not to
think about the fact that I was eating, which is a form of thinking about it.
Across the table from me, Mychal Turner was scribbling in a yellow-paper
notebook. Our lunch table was like a long-running play on Broadway: The cast
changed over the years, but the roles never did. Mychal was The Artsy One. He
was talking with Daisy Ramirez, who’d played the role of my Best and Most
Fearless Friend since elementary school, but I couldn’t follow their conversation
over the noise of all the others.
What was my part in this play? The Sidekick. I was Daisy’s Friend, or Ms.
Holmes’s Daughter. I was somebody’s something.
I felt my stomach begin to work on the sandwich, and even over everybody’s
talking, I could hear it digesting, all the bacteria chewing the slime of peanut
butter—the students inside of me eating at my internal cafeteria. A shiver
convulsed through me.
“Didn’t you go to camp with him?” Daisy asked me.
“With who?”
“Davis Pickett,” she said.
“Yeah,” I said. “Why?”
“Aren’t you listening?” Daisy asked. I am listening, I thought, to the
cacophony of my digestive tract. Of course I’d long known that I was playing
host to a massive collection of parasitic organisms, but I didn’t much like being
reminded of it. By cell count, humans are approximately 50 percent microbial,
meaning that about half of the cells that make you up are not yours at all. There
are something like a thousand times more microbes living in my particular
biome than there are human beings on earth, and it often seems like I can feel
them living and breeding and dying in and on me. I wiped my sweaty palms on
my jeans and tried to control my breathing. Admittedly, I have some anxiety
problems, but I would argue it isn’t irrational to be concerned about the fact that
you are a skin-encased bacterial colony.
Mychal said, “His dad was about to be arrested for bribery or something, but
the night before the raid he disappeared. There’s a hundred-thousand-dollar
reward out for him.”
“And you know his kid,” Daisy said.
“Knew him,” I answered.
I watched Daisy attack her school-provided rectangular pizza and green
beans with a fork. She kept glancing up at me, her eyes widening as if to say,
Well? I could tell she wanted me to ask her about something, but I couldn’t tell
what, because my stomach wouldn’t shut up, which was forcing me deep inside
a worry that I’d somehow contracted a parasitic infection.
I could half hear Mychal telling Daisy about his new art project, in which he
was using Photoshop to average the faces of a hundred people named Mychal,
and the average of their faces would be this new, one-hundred-and-first Mychal,
which was an interesting idea, and I wanted to listen, but the cafeteria was so
loud, and I couldn’t stop wondering whether there was something wrong with
the microbial balance of power inside me.
Excessive abdominal noise is an uncommon, but not unprecedented,
presenting symptom of infection with the bacteria Clostridium difficile, which
can be fatal. I pulled out my phone and searched “human microbiome” to reread
Wikipedia’s introduction to the trillions of microorganisms currently inside me. I
clicked over to the article about C. diff, scrolling to the part about how most C.
diff infections occur in hospitals. I scrolled down farther to a list of symptoms,
none of which I had, except for the excessive abdominal noises, although I knew
from previous searches that the Cleveland Clinic had reported the case of one
person who’d died of C. diff after presenting at the hospital with only abdominal
pain and fever. I reminded myself that I didn’t have a fever, and my self replied:
You don’t have a fever YET.
At the cafeteria, where a shrinking slice of my consciousness still resided,
Daisy was telling Mychal that his averaging project shouldn’t be about people
named Mychal but about imprisoned men who’d later been exonerated. “It’ll be
easier, anyway,” she said, “because they all have mug shots taken from the same
angle, and then it’s not just about names but about race and class and mass
incarceration,” and Mychal was like, “You’re a genius, Daisy,” and she said,
“You sound surprised,” and meanwhile I was thinking that if half the cells inside
of you are not you, doesn’t that challenge the whole notion of me as a singular
pronoun, let alone as the author of my fate? And I fell pretty far down that
recursive wormhole until it transported me completely out of the White River
High School cafeteria into some non-sensorial place only properly crazy people
get to visit.
Ever since I was little, I’ve pressed my right thumbnail into the finger pad of
my middle finger, and so now there’s this weird callus over my fingerprint. After
so many years of doing this, I can open up a crack in the skin really easily, so I
cover it up with a Band-Aid to try to prevent infection. But sometimes I get
worried that there already is an infection, and so I need to drain it, and the only
way to do that is to reopen the wound and press out any blood that will come.
Once I start thinking about splitting the skin apart, I literally cannot not do it. I
apologize for the double negative, but it’s a real double negative of a situation, a
bind from which negating the negation is truly the only escape. So anyway, I
started to want to feel my thumbnail biting into the skin of my finger pad, and I
knew that resistance was more or less futile, so beneath the cafeteria table, I
slipped the Band-Aid off my finger and dug my thumbnail into the callused skin
until I felt the crack open.
“Holmesy,” Daisy said. I looked up at her. “We’re almost through lunch and
you haven’t even mentioned my hair.” She shook out her hair, with so-red-theywere-
pink highlights. Right. She’d dyed her hair.
I swum up out of the depths and said, “It’s bold.”
“I know, right? It says, ‘Ladies and gentlemen and also people who do not
identify as ladies or gentlemen, Daisy Ramirez won’t break her promises, but
she will break your heart.” Daisy’s self-proclaimed life motto was “Break
Hearts, Not Promises.” She kept threatening to get it tattooed on her ankle when
she turned eighteen. Daisy turned back to Mychal, and I to my thoughts. The
stomach grumbling had grown, if anything, louder. I felt like I might vomit. For
someone who actively dislikes bodily fluids, I throw up quite a lot.
“Holmesy, you okay?” Daisy asked. I nodded. Sometimes I wondered why
she liked me, or at least tolerated me. Why any of them did. Even I found myself
annoying.
I could feel sweat sprouting from my forehead, and once I begin to sweat,
it’s impossible to stop. I’ll keep sweating for hours, and not just my face or my
armpits. My neck sweats. My boobs sweat. My calves sweat. Maybe I did have a
fever.
Beneath the table, I slid the old Band-Aid into my pocket and, without
looking, pulled out a new one, unwrapped it, and then glanced down to apply it
to my finger. All the while, I was breathing in through my nose and out through
my mouth, in the manner advised by Dr. Karen Singh, exhaling at a pace “that
would make a candle flicker but not go out. Imagine that candle, Aza, flickering
from your breath but still there, always there.” So I tried that, but the thought
spiral kept tightening anyway. I could hear Dr. Singh saying I shouldn’t get out
my phone, that I mustn’t look up the same questions over and over, but I got it
out anyway, and reread the “Human Microbiota” Wikipedia article.
The thing about a spiral is, if you follow it inward, it never actually ends. It
just keeps tightening, infinitely.
—
I sealed the Ziploc bag around the last quarter of my sandwich, got up, and
tossed it into an overfilled trash can. I heard a voice from behind me. “How
concerned should I be that you haven’t said more than two words in a row all
day?”
“Thought spiral,” I mumbled in reply. Daisy had known me since we were
six, long enough to get it.
“I figured. Sorry, man. Let’s hang out today.”
This girl Molly walked up to us, smiling, and said, “Uh, Daisy, just FYI,
your Kool-Aid dye job is staining your shirt.”
Daisy looked down at her shoulders, and indeed, her striped top had turned
pink in spots. She flinched for a second, then straightened her spine. “Yeah, it’s
part of the look, Molly. Stained shirts are huge in Paris right now.” She turned
away from Molly and said, “Right, so we’ll go to your house and watch Star
Wars: Rebels.” Daisy was really into Star Wars—and not just the movies, but
also the books and the animated shows and the kids’ show where they’re all
made out of Lego. Like, she wrote fan fiction about Chewbacca’s love life. “And
we will improve your mood until you are able to say three or even four words in
a row; sound good?”
“Sounds good.”
“And then you can take me to work. Sorry, but I need a ride.”
“Okay.” I wanted to say more, but the thoughts kept coming, unbidden and
unwanted. If I’d been the author, I would’ve stopped thinking about my
microbiome. I would’ve told Daisy how much I liked her idea for Mychal’s art
project, and I would’ve told her that I did remember Davis Pickett, that I
remembered being eleven and carrying a vague but constant fear. I would’ve told
her that I remembered once at camp lying next to Davis on the edge of a dock,
our legs dangling over, our backs against the rough-hewn planks of wood,
staring together up at a cloudless summer sky. I would’ve told her that Davis and
I never talked much, or even looked at each other, but it didn’t matter, because
we were looking at the same sky together, which is maybe more intimate than
eye contact anyway. Anybody can look at you. It’s quite rare to find someone
who sees the same world you see.
TWO
THE FEAR HAD MOSTLY SWEATED OUT OF ME, but as I walked from the cafeteria to
history class, I couldn’t stop myself from taking out my phone and rereading the
horror story that is the “Human Microbiota” Wikipedia article. I was reading and
walking when I heard my mother shout at me through her open classroom door.
She was seated behind her metal desk, leaning over a book. Mom was a math
teacher, but reading was her great love.
“No phones in the hallway, Aza!” I put my phone away and went into her
classroom. There were four minutes remaining in my lunch period, which was
the perfect length for a Mom conversation. She looked up and must’ve seen
something in my eyes. “You okay?”
“Yeah,” I said.
“You’re not anxious?” she asked. At some point, Dr. Singh had told Mom
not to ask if I was feeling anxious, so she’d stopped phrasing it as a direct
question.
“I’m fine.”
“You’ve been taking your meds,” she said. Again, not a direct question.
“Yeah,” I said, which was broadly true. I’d had a bit of a crack-up my
freshman year, after which I was prescribed a circular white pill to be taken once
daily. I took it, on average, maybe thrice weekly.
“You look . . .” Sweaty, is what I knew she meant.
“Who decides when the bells ring?” I asked. “Like, the school bells?”
“You know what, I have no idea. I suppose that’s decided by someone on the
superintendent’s staff.”
“Like, why are lunch periods thirty-seven minutes long instead of fifty? Or
twenty-two? Or whatever?”
“Your brain seems like a very intense place,” Mom answered.
“It’s just weird, how this is decided by someone I don’t know and then I
have to live by it. Like, I live on someone else’s schedule. And I’ve never even
met them.”
“Yes, well, in that respect and many others, American high schools do rather
resemble prisons.”
My eyes widened. “Oh my God, Mom, you’re so right. The metal detectors.
The cinder-block walls.”
“They’re both overcrowded and underfunded,” Mom said. “And both have
bells that ring to tell you when to move.”
“And you don’t get to choose when you eat lunch,” I said. “And prisons have
power-thirsty, corrupt guards, just like schools have teachers.”
She shot me a look, but then started laughing. “You headed straight home
after school?”
“Yeah, then I gotta take Daisy to work.”
Mom nodded. “Sometimes I miss you being a little kid, but then I remember
Chuck E. Cheese.”
“She’s just trying to save money for college.”
My mom glanced back down at her book. “You know, if we lived in Europe,
college wouldn’t cost much.” I braced myself for Mom’s cost-of-college rant.
“There are free universities in Brazil. Most of Europe. China. But here they want
to charge you twenty-five thousand dollars a year, for in-state tuition. I just
finished paying off my loans a few years ago, and soon we’ll have to take out
ones for you.”
“I’m only a junior. I’ve got plenty of time to win the lottery. And if that
doesn’t work out, I’ll just pay for school by selling meth.”
She smiled wanly. Mom really worried about paying for me to go to school.
“You sure you’re okay?” she asked.
I nodded as the bell sounded from on high, sending me to history.
—
By the time I made it to my car after school, Daisy was already in the passenger
seat. She’d changed out of the stained shirt she’d been wearing into her red
Chuck E. Cheese polo, and was sitting with her backpack in her lap, drinking a
container of school milk. Daisy was the only person I’d trusted with a key to
Harold. Mom didn’t even have her own Harold key, but Daisy did.
“Please do not drink non-clear liquids in Harold,” I told her.
“Milk is a clear liquid,” she said.
“Lies,” I answered, and before we set off, I drove Harold over to the front
entrance and waited while Daisy threw away her milk.
—
Maybe you’ve been in love. I mean real love, the kind my grandmother used to
describe by quoting the apostle Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians, the love
that is kind and patient, that does not envy or boast, that beareth all things and
believeth all things and endureth all things. I don’t like to throw the L-word
around; it’s too good and rare a feeling to cheapen with overuse. You can live a
good life without ever knowing real love, of the Corinthians variety, but I was
fortunate to have found it with Harold.
He was a sixteen-year-old Toyota Corolla with a paint color called Mystic
Teal Mica and an engine that clanked in a steady rhythm like the beating of his
immaculate metallic heart. Harold had been my dad’s car—in fact, Dad had
named him Harold. Mom never sold him, so he stayed in the garage for eight
years, until my sixteenth birthday.
Getting Harold’s engine running after so long took all of the four hundred
dollars I’d saved over the course of my life—allowances, change ferreted away
when Mom sent me down the street to buy something at the Circle K, summer
work at Subway, Christmas gifts from my grandparents—so, in a way, Harold
was the culmination of my whole being, at least financially speaking. And I
loved him. I dreamed about him quite a lot. He had an exceptionally spacious
trunk, a custom-installed, huge white steering wheel, and a backseat bench clad
in pebble-beige leather. He accelerated with the gentle serenity of the Buddhist
Zen master who knows nothing really needs to be done quickly, and his brakes
whined like metal machine music, and I loved him.
However, Harold did not have Bluetooth connectivity, or for that matter a
CD player, meaning that while in Harold’s company, one had three choices: 1.
Drive in silence; 2. Listen to the radio; or 3. Listen to Side B of my dad’s
cassette of Missy Elliott’s excellent album So Addictive, which—because it
would not eject from the cassette player—I’d already heard hundreds of times in
my life.
And in the end, Harold’s imperfect audio system happened to be the last note
in the melody of coincidences that changed my life.
—
Daisy and I were scanning stations in search of a song by a particular brilliant
and underappreciated boy band when we landed upon a news story. “—
Indianapolis-based Pickett Engineering, a construction firm employing more
than ten thousand people worldwide, today—” I moved my hand toward the scan
button, but Daisy pushed it away.
“This is what I was telling you about!” she said as the radio continued, “—
one-hundred-thousand-dollar reward for information leading to the whereabouts
of company CEO Russell Pickett. Pickett, who disappeared the night before a
police raid on his home related to a fraud and bribery investigation, was last seen
at his riverside compound on September eighth. Anyone with information
regarding his whereabouts is encouraged to call the Indianapolis Police
Department.”
“A hundred thousand dollars,” Daisy said. “And you know his kid.”
“Knew,” I said. For two summers, after fifth and sixth grades, Davis and I
had gone to Sad Camp together, which is what we’d called Camp Spero, this
place down in Brown County for kids with dead parents.
Aside from hanging out together at Sad Camp, Davis and I would also
sometimes see each other during the school year, because he lived just down the
river from me, but on the opposite bank. Mom and I lived on the side that
sometimes flooded. The Picketts lived on the side with the stone-gabled walls
that forced the rising water in our direction.
“He probably wouldn’t even remember me.”
“Everyone remembers you, Holmesy,” she said.
“That’s not—”
“It’s not a value judgment. I’m not saying you’re good or generous or kind
or whatever. I’m just saying you’re memorable.”
“I haven’t seen him in years,” I said. But of course you don’t forget
playdates at a mansion that contains a golf course, a pool with an island, and five
waterslides. Davis was the closest thing to a proper celebrity I’d ever
encountered.
“A hundred thousand dollars,” Daisy said again. We pulled onto I-465, the
beltway that circumscribes Indianapolis. “I’m fixing Skee-Ball machines for
eight forty an hour and there’s a hundred grand waiting for us.”
“I wouldn’t say waiting for us. Anyway, I have to read about the effects of
smallpox on indigenous populations tonight, so I can’t really solve The Case of
the Fugitive Billionaire.” I eased Harold up to highway speed. I never drove him
faster than the speed limit. I loved him too much.
“Well, you know him better than I do, so to quote the infallible boys in the
world’s greatest pop group, ‘You’re the One,’” which was this super-cheesy song
I was way too old to love, but loved nonetheless.
“I want to disagree with you, but that is such a great song.”
“You’re. The. One. ‘You’re the one that I choose. The one I’ll never lose.
You’re my forever. My stars. My sky. My air. It’s you.’”
We laughed, and I changed the radio station and thought it was over, but then
Daisy started reading me an Indianapolis Star story from her phone. “‘Russell
Pickett, the controversial CEO and founder of Pickett Engineering, wasn’t home
when a search warrant was served by the Indianapolis police Friday morning,
and he hasn’t been home since. Pickett’s lawyer, Simon Morris, says he has no
information about Pickett’s whereabouts, and in a press conference today,
Detective Dwight Allen said that no activity on Pickett’s credit cards or bank
accounts has been noted since the evening before the raid.’ Blah-blah-blah . . .
‘Allen also asserted that aside from a camera at the front gate, there were no
surveillance cameras on the property. A copy of a police report obtained by the
Star says that Pickett was last seen Thursday evening by his sons, Davis and
Noah.’ Blah-blah-blah . . . ‘estate just north of Thirty-Eighth Street, lots of
lawsuits, supports the zoo,’ blah-blah-blah . . . ‘call the police if you know
anything,’ blah-blah-blah. Wait, how are there no security cameras? What kind
of billionaire doesn’t have security cameras?”
“The kind who doesn’t want his shady business recorded,” I said. As we
drove, I kept turning the story over in my head. I knew some edge of it was
jagged, but I couldn’t figure out which one, until I snagged a memory of eerie
green coyotes with white eyes. “Wait, there was a camera. Not a security one,
but Davis and his brother had a motion-capture camera in the woods by the river.
It had, like, night vision, and it would snap a picture whenever something
walked past—deer or coyotes or whatever.”
“Holmesy,” she said. “We have a lead.”
“And because of the camera at the front gate, he couldn’t have just driven
off,” I said. “So either he climbs over his own wall, or else he walks through the
woods down to the river and leaves from there, right?”
“Yes . . .”
“So he could’ve tripped that camera. I mean, it’s been a few years since I
was there; maybe it’s gone.”
“And maybe it’s not!” Daisy said.
“Yeah. Maybe it’s not.”
“Exit here,” she said suddenly, and I did. I knew it was the wrong exit, but I
took it anyway, and without Daisy even telling me to, I got in the right lane to
drive back into the city, toward my house. Toward Davis’s house.
Daisy took out her phone and raised it to her ear. “Hey, Eric. It’s Daisy.
Listen, I’m really sorry, but I’ve got the stomach flu. Could be norovirus.”
“. . .”
“Yeah, no problem. Sorry again.” She hung up, put her phone in her bag, and
said, “If you even imply diarrhea, they tell you to stay home because they’re so
scared of outbreaks. Right, okay, we’re doing this. You still got that canoe?”
THREE
YEARS BEFORE, Mom and I had sometimes paddled down the White River, past
Davis’s house to the park behind the art museum. We’d beach the canoe and
walk around for a bit, then paddle back home against the lazy current. But I
hadn’t been down to the water in years. The White River is beautiful in the
abstract—blue herons and geese and deer and all that stuff—but the actual water
itself smells like human sewage. Actually, it doesn’t smell like human sewage; it
smells of human sewage, because whenever it rains, the sewers overflow and the
collective waste of Central Indiana dumps directly into the river.
We pulled into my driveway. I got out, walked to the garage door, squatted
down, wriggled my fingers under the door, and then lifted it up. I got back into
the car and parked, while Daisy kept telling me we were going to be rich.
The garage door exertion had gotten me sweating a bit, so when I got inside I
headed straight for my room and turned on the window AC unit, sat cross-legged
on my bed, and let the cold air blow against my back. My room was a cluttered
mess, with dirty clothes everywhere and a spill of papers—worksheets, old tests,
college pamphlets Mom brought home—that covered my desk and also sort of
spread out along the floor. Daisy stood in the doorway. “You got any clothes
around here that would fit me?” she asked. “I feel like you shouldn’t meet a
billionaire in a Chuck E. Cheese uniform, or in a shirt stained pink by your hair,
which are my only outfits at the moment.”
Daisy was about my mom’s size, so we decided to raid her closet, and as we
tried to find the least Momish top and jeans combo available, Daisy talked. She
talked a lot. “I’ve got a theory about uniforms. I think they design them so that
you become, like, a nonperson, so that you’re not Daisy Ramirez, a Human
Being, but instead a thing that brings people pizza and exchanges their tickets for
plastic dinosaurs. It’s like the uniform is designed to hide me.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Fucking systemic oppression,” Daisy mumbled, and then pulled a hideous
purple blouse out of the closet. “Your mom dresses like a ninth-grade math
teacher.”
“Well, she is a ninth-grade math teacher.”
“That’s no excuse.”
“Maybe a dress?” I held up a calf-length black dress with pink paisleys. Just
awful.
“I think I’m gonna roll with the uniform,” she said.
“Yeah.”
I heard Mom drive up, and even though she wouldn’t mind us borrowing
clothes, I felt a jolt of nervousness. Daisy saw it and took me by the wrist. We
snuck out to the backyard before Mom made it inside, and then picked our way
through a little bramble of honeysuckle bushes at the edge of the yard.
It turned out we did still have that canoe, overturned and full of dead spiders.
Daisy flipped it over, then wrenched the paddles and two once-orange life
jackets from the ivy that had grown over them. She swept out the canoe by hand,
tossed the paddles and the life jackets into it, and dragged the canoe toward the
riverbank. Daisy was short and didn’t look fit, but she was super strong.
“The White River is so dirty,” I said.
“Holmesy, you’re being irrational. Help me with this thing.”
I grabbed the back part of the canoe. “It’s like fifty percent urine. And that’s
the good half.”
“You’re the one,” she said again, then heaved the canoe over the riverbank
into the water. She jumped down the bank onto a little peninsula of mud,
wrapped a too-small life vest around her neck, and climbed into the front of the
canoe.
I followed her, settled into the rear seat, and then used the paddle to push us
out into the river. It had been a long time since I’d steered a canoe, but the water
was low, and the river was so wide I didn’t have to do much. Daisy looked back
at me and smiled with her mouth closed. Being on the river made me feel little
again.
As kids, Daisy and I had played all up and down the riverbank when the
water was low like this. We played a game called “river kids,” imagining we
lived alone on the river, scavenging for our livelihood and hiding from the adults
who wanted to put us in an orphanage. I remembered Daisy throwing daddy
longlegs at me because she knew I hated them, and I’d scream and run away,
flailing my arms but not actually scared, because back then all emotions felt like
play, like I was experimenting with feeling rather than stuck with it. True terror
isn’t being scared; it’s not having a choice in the matter.
“You know this river is the only reason Indianapolis even exists?” Daisy
said. She turned around in the canoe to face me. “So, like, Indiana had just
become a state, and they wanted to build a new city for the state capital, so
everybody’s debating where it should be. The obvious compromise is to put it in
the middle. So these dudes are looking at a map of their new state and they
notice there is a river right here, smack in the center of the state, and they’re like
—boom—perfect place for our capital, because it’s 1819 or whatever, and you
need water to be a real city for shipping and stuff.
“So they announce, we’re gonna build a new city! On a river! And we’re
gonna be clever and call it Indiana-polis! And it’s only after they make the
announcement that they notice the White River is, like, six inches deep, and you
can’t float a kayak down it, let alone a steamship. For a while, Indianapolis was
the largest city in the world not on a navigable waterway.”
“How do you even know that?” I asked.
“My dad’s a big history nerd.” Right then her phone started ringing. “Holy
shit. I just conjured him.” She held the phone up to her ear. “Hey, Papa. . . . Um,
yeah, of course. . . . No, he won’t mind. . . . Cool, yeah, be home at six.” She slid
her phone back into her pocket and turned around to me, squinting into the
sunlight. “He was asking if I could switch shifts to watch Elena because Mom
got extra hours, and I didn’t have to lie about already not being at work, and
now my dad thinks I care about my sister. Holmesy, everything’s working out.
Our destiny is coming into focus. We are about to live the American Dream,
which is, of course, to benefit from someone else’s misfortune.”
I laughed, and my laughter seemed freakishly loud as it echoed across the
deserted river. On a half-submerged tree near the river’s bank, a softshell turtle
noticed us and plopped into the water. The river was lousy with turtles.
After the first bend in the river, we passed a shallow island made of millions
of white pebbles. A blue heron stood perched on an old bleached tire, and when
she saw us she spread her wings and flew away, more pterodactyl than bird. The
island forced us into a narrow channel on the east side of the river, and we
floated underneath sycamore trees leaning out over the water in search of more
sunlight.
Most of the trees were covered in leaves, some streaked with pink in the first
hints of autumn. But we passed under one dead tree, leafless but still standing,
and I looked up through its branches, which intersected to fracture the cloudless
blue sky into all kinds of irregular polygons.
I still have my dad’s phone. I keep it and a charging cord hidden in Harold’s
trunk next to the spare tire. A ton of the pictures on his phone were of leafless
branches dividing up the sky, like the view I had as we floated under that
sycamore. I always wondered what he saw in that, in the split-apart sky.
Anyway, it really was a beautiful day—golden sunshine bearing down on us
with just enough heat. I’m not much of an outside cat, so I rarely have occasion
to consider the weather, but in Indianapolis we get eight to ten properly beautiful
days a year, and this was one of them. I hardly had to paddle at all as the river
bent to the west. The water crinkled with sunlight. A pair of wood ducks noticed
us and took off, their wings flapping desperately.
At last, we came to the bit of land that as kids we’d named Pirates Island. It
was a real river island, not like the pebble beach we’d paddled past earlier.
Pirates Island had thickets of honeysuckle and tall trees with trunks gnarled from
the yearly spring floods. Because the river has so much agricultural runoff, there
were crops, too: Little tomato and soybean plants sprang up everywhere, well
fertilized by all the sewage.
I steered the canoe onto the algae-soaked beach and we got out to walk
around. Something about the river had made Daisy and me quiet, almost
unaware of each other, and we wandered in different directions.
I’d spent part of my eleventh birthday here. Mom had made a treasure map,
and after cake at home, Daisy and Mom and I got into the canoe and paddled
down to Pirates Island. We dug with spades at the base of a tree and found a little
chest full of chocolate coins wrapped in gold foil. Davis had met us down there,
with his little brother, Noah. I remembered digging until my spade hit the plastic
of the treasure chest, and allowing myself to feel like it was real treasure, even
though I knew it wasn’t. I was so good at being a kid, and so terrible at being
whatever I was now.
I walked along the whole edge of the island until I found Daisy sitting on an
uprooted barkless tree that had beached here as some flood receded. I sat down
next to her and looked into the little pool below our feet, where crawfish were
darting around. The pool seemed to be shrinking—it had been a drier summer
than usual, and hotter.
“Remember that birthday party you had here?” she asked.
“Yeah,” I said. At the party, Davis had briefly lost this Iron Man action
figure he always had with him. He’d had it for so long that all the decals had
been rubbed away; it was just a red torso and yellow limbs. He’d really freaked
out when he lost it, I remembered, but then my mom found it.
“You okay, Holmesy?”
“Yeah.”
“Can you say anything other than yeah?”
“Yeah,” I said, and smiled a little.
—
We sat for a while, and then stood up together without speaking and waded
through the knee-deep water until we got to the river’s edge. Why didn’t it
bother me to slosh through the filthy water of the White River when hours earlier
I’d found it intolerable to hear my stomach rumble? I wish I knew.
A chain-link fence held in the boulders that formed the floodwall, and I
climbed it, then reached down to help Daisy. We crawled up the riverbank and
found ourselves in a forest of sycamore and maple trees. In the distance, I could
see the manicured lawns of Pickett’s golf course, and beyond that the glass-andsteel
Pickett mansion, which had been designed by some famous architect.
We wandered around for a while as I tried to get my bearings, and then I
heard Daisy whisper, “Holmesy.” I picked my way through the woods toward
her. She’d found the night-vision camera, mounted to a tree, about four feet off
the ground. It was a black circle, maybe an inch in diameter—the kind of thing
you’d never notice in a forest unless you knew to look for it.
I opened up my phone and connected to the night-vision camera, which
wasn’t password protected. In seconds, photos started downloading to my phone.
I deleted the first two, which the camera had taken of us, and swiped past a
dozen more from the past week—deer and coyotes and raccoons and possums,
all of them either daytime shots or green silhouettes with bright white eyes.
“Don’t want to alarm you, but there’s a golf cart headed in our vague
direction,” Daisy said quietly. I looked up. The cart was still a ways away. I
swiped through more pictures until I got back to September 9th, and there, yes,
in shades of green I could see the back of a stocky man wearing a striped
nightshirt. Time stamp 1:01:03 A.M. I screenshotted it.
“Dude’s definitely spotted us,” Daisy said nervously.
I glanced up again and mumbled, “I’m hurrying.” I’d swiped to see the
previous picture, but it was taking forever to load. I heard Daisy run off, but I
stayed, waiting for the photograph. It was odd, for me to be the calm one while
feeling Daisy’s nerves jangling. But the things that make other people nervous
have never scared me. I’m not afraid of men in golf carts or horror movies or
roller coasters. I didn’t know precisely what I was afraid of, but it wasn’t this.
The image revealed itself in slow motion, one line of pixels at a time. Coyote. I
glanced up, saw the man in the golf cart seeing me, and I bolted.
I wove back toward the river, scrambled down the riverbank wall, and found
Daisy standing above my overturned canoe, holding a large jagged rock high
above her head.
“What the hell are you doing?” I asked.
“Whoever that guy is, he definitely saw you,” she said, “so I’m making an
excuse for you.”
“What?”
“We’ve got no choice but to damsel-in-distress this situation, Holmesy,” she
said, and then brought the rock down with all her force onto the hull of the
canoe, splintering the green paint and revealing the fiberglass below. She flipped
the canoe back over; it immediately started taking on water. “Okay, now I’m
gonna hide and you’re gonna talk to whoever is coming in that golf cart.”
“What? No. No way.”
“A distressed damsel has no companions,” she said.
“No. Way.”
And then a voice called out from atop the gabled wall. “You all right down
there?” I looked up and saw a skinny old man with deep lines in his face,
wearing a black suit and white shirt.
“Our canoe,” Daisy said. “It has a hole in it. We’re actually friends with
Davis Pickett. Doesn’t he live here?”
“I’m Lyle,” the man said. “Security. I can get you home.”
FOUR
LYLE USHERED US INTO HIS GOLF CART and then drove us down a narrow asphalt
path along the golf course, past a big log cabin with a wooden sign out front
identifying it as THE COTTAGE.
I hadn’t visited the Pickett estate in many years, and it had grown even more
majestic. The sand traps of the golf course were newly raked. The cart path we
drove on had no cracks or bumps. Newly planted maple trees lined the path. But
mostly I just saw endless grass, weedless, freshly mown into a diamond pattern.
The Pickett estate was silent, sterile, and endless—like a newly built housing
subdivision before actual people move into it. I loved it.
As we drove, Daisy struck up a wholly unsubtle conversation. “So you head
up security here?”
“I am security here,” he answered.
“How long have you worked for Mr. Pickett?”
“Long enough to know you’re not friends with Davis,” he answered.
Daisy, who lacked the capacity to experience embarrassment, was not
discouraged. “Holmesy here is the friend. Were you working the day Pickett
disappeared?”
“Mr. Pickett doesn’t like staff on the property after dark or before dawn,” he
answered.
“How many staff are there exactly?”
Lyle stopped the golf cart. “Y’all best know Davis, or else I’m taking you
downtown and having you booked for trespassing.”
—
We rounded a corner and I saw the pool complex, a shimmering blue expanse
with the same island I remembered from my childhood, except now it was
covered by a glass-plated geodesic dome. The waterslides—cylinders that
curved and wove around one another—were still there, too, but they were dry.
On a patio beside the pool were a dozen teak lounge chairs, each with a
white towel laid out atop the cushions. We drove halfway around the pool to
another patio, where Davis Pickett was reclining on a lounger. He was wearing
his school polo shirt and khaki pants, holding a book at an angle to block the sun
as he read.
When he heard the cart, he sat up and looked over at us. He had skinny,
sunburned legs and knobby knees. He wore plastic-rimmed glasses and an
Indiana Pacers hat.
“Aza Holmes?” he asked.
He stood up. The sun was behind him, so I could hardly see his face. I got
out of the golf cart and walked over to him.
“Hi,” I said. I didn’t know if I should hug him, and he didn’t seem to know if
he should hug me, so we just sort of stood there not touching, which to be honest
is my preferred form of greeting.
“To what do I owe the pleasure?” he asked, his voice flat, neutral,
unreadable.
Daisy walked up behind me and held out her hand, then shook Davis’s
forcefully. “Daisy Ramirez, Holmesy’s best friend. We had a canoe puncture.”
“We hit a rock and landed on Pirates Island,” I said.
“You know these people?” Lyle asked.
“Yeah, it’s fine, thanks, Lyle. Can I get you guys anything? Water? Dr
Pepper?”
“Dr Pepper?” I said, a bit confused.
“Wasn’t that your favorite soda?”
I just blinked at him for a second and then said, “Um, yeah. I’ll have a Dr
Pepper.”
“Lyle, can we get three Dr Peppers?”
“Sure thing, boss,” Lyle answered, and took off on the golf cart.
Daisy’s glance at me said, I told you he’d remember, and then she wandered
off. Davis didn’t seem to notice. There was something sweetly shy about the way
he looked at me, glancing at, and then away from, my face, his brown eyes
bigger than life through his glasses. His eyes, his nose, his mouth—all his facial
features were a bit too big for him, like they’d grown up but his face was still a
kid’s.
“I’m not sure what to say,” he said. “I’m . . . not good at chitchat.”
“Try saying what you’re thinking,” I said. “That’s something I never ever
do.”
He smiled a little and then shrugged. “Okay. I’m thinking, I wish she wasn’t
after the reward.”
“What reward?” I asked, unconvincingly.
Davis sat down on one of the teak loungers, and I sat across from him. He
leaned forward, bony elbows on bony knees. “I thought of you a couple weeks
ago,” he said. “Right when he disappeared, I kept hearing his name on the news,
and they would say his full name—Russell Davis Pickett—and I kept thinking,
you know, that’s my name; and it was just so weird, to hear the newscasters say,
‘Russell Davis Pickett has been reported missing.’ Because I was right here.”
“And that made you think of me?”
“Yeah, I don’t know. I remember you telling me—like, I asked about your
name once and you said that your mom named you Aza because she wanted you
to have your own name, a sound you could make your own.”
“It was my dad, actually.” I could remember Dad talking to me about my
name, telling me, It spans the whole alphabet, because we wanted you to know
you can be anything. “Whereas, your dad . . .” I said.
“Right, made me a junior. Resigned me to juniority.”
“Well, you’re not your name,” I said.
“Of course I am. I can’t not be Davis Pickett. Can’t not be my father’s son.”
“I guess,” I said.
“And I can’t not be an orphan.”
“I’m sorry.”
His tired eyes met mine. “A lot of old friends have been in touch the last few
days, and I’m not an idiot. I know why. But I don’t know where my dad is.”
“The truth is—” I said, and then stopped as a shadow flashed over us. I
turned around. Daisy was standing over me.
“The truth is,” she said, “we were listening to the radio, heard a news report
about your father, and then Holmesy here told me she had a crush on you when
you were kids.”
“Daisy,” I sputtered.
“And I was, like, let’s go see him, I bet it’s true love. So we arranged for a
shipwreck, and then you remembered she likes Dr Pepper, and IT IS TRUE
LOVE. It’s just like The Tempest, and okay, I’m going to leave you now so you
can live happily ever after.” And her shadow was gone, replaced by the golden
light of the sun.
“Is that—really?” Davis asked.
“Well, I don’t think it’s exactly like The Tempest,” I said. But I couldn’t
stand to tell him the truth. Anyway, it wasn’t a lie. Not all the way. “I mean, we
were just kids.”
After a minute, he said, “You almost don’t even look like the same person.”
“What?”
“Like, you were this scrawny little lightning bolt, and now you’re . . .”
“What?”
“Different. Grown up.” My stomach was kind of churning, but I couldn’t tell
why. I never understood my body—was it scared or excited?
Davis was looking past me at the stand of trees along the river’s edge. “I
really am sorry about your dad,” I said.
He shrugged. “My dad’s a huge shitbag. He skipped town before getting
arrested because he’s a coward.” I didn’t know how to answer that. The way
people talked about fathers could almost make you glad not to have one. “I
really don’t know where he is, Aza. And if anyone does know, they’re not gonna
say anything, because he can pay them a lot more than the reward. I mean, a
hundred thousand dollars? A hundred thousand dollars isn’t a lot of money.” I
just stared at him. “Sorry,” he said. “That probably sounded dickish.”
“Probably?”
“Right, yeah,” he said. “I just mean . . . he’ll get away with it. He always
gets away with it.”
I was starting to respond when I heard Daisy return. She had a guy with her
—tall, broad-shouldered, wearing matching khaki shorts and a polo shirt. “We
are going to meet a tuatara,” Daisy said excitedly.
Davis got up and said, “Aza, this is Malik Moore, our zoologist.” He said
“our zoologist” as if they were normal words to say in the course of everyday
conversation, as if most people who reached a certain standing in life acquired a
zoologist.
I stood up and shook Malik’s hand. “I take care of the tuatara,” he explained.
Everyone seemed to assume I knew what the hell a tuatara was. Malik walked
over to the edge of the pool, knelt down, lifted a door hidden in the patio’s tile,
and pressed a button. A reticulated chrome walkway emerged from the pool’s
edge and arched over the water to reach the island. Daisy grabbed my arm and
whispered, “Is this real life?” and then the zoologist waved his hand
dramatically, gesturing for us to walk across the bridge.
He followed behind us, across the metal bridge to the geodesic dome. Malik
swiped a card near the glass door. I heard a seal break, and then the door opened.
I stepped in and was suddenly in a tropical climate at least twenty degrees
warmer and considerably more humid than the actual outdoors.
Daisy and I stayed near the entryway while Malik darted around and finally
emerged with a large lizard, maybe two feet long and three inches tall. Its
dragon-like tail wrapped around Malik’s arm.
“You can pet her,” Malik said, and Daisy did, but I could see scratch marks
on Malik’s hand indicating that it didn’t always like being petted, so when he
turned it toward me, I said, “I don’t really like lizards.”
He then explained to me in rather excruciating detail that Tua (it had a name)
was not a lizard at all, but a genetically distinct creature that dated back to the
Mesozoic Era 200 million years ago, and that it was basically a living dinosaur,
and that tuatara can live to be at least 150 years old, and that the plural of tuatara
is tuatara, and that they are the only extant species from the order
Rhynchocephalia, and that they were endangered in their native New Zealand,
and that he’d written his PhD thesis on tuatara molecular evolution rates, and on
and on until the door opened again, and Lyle said, “Dr Peppers, boss.” I took
them and handed one to Davis and one to Daisy.
“You sure you don’t want to pet her?” Malik asked.
“I’m also afraid of dinosaurs,” I explained.
“Holmesy has most of the major fears,” Daisy said as she petted Tua.
“Anyway, we should get going. I’ve got some babysitting duties to attend to.”
“I’ll give you a ride home,” said Davis.
—
Davis said he needed to stop by the house, and I was going to wait for him
outside, but Daisy shoved me forward so hard I found myself walking alongside
him. Davis pulled open the front door, a massive pane of glass at least ten feet
high, and we walked into an enormous marble-floored room. To my left, Noah
Pickett lay on a couch, playing a space combat video game on a huge screen.
“Noah,” Davis said, “you remember Aza Holmes?”
“’Sup,” he said, without turning away from the game.
Davis darted up a flight of floating marble stairs, leaving me alone with
Noah—or so I thought—until a woman I hadn’t seen called out, “That’s a real
Picasso.” She was dressed all in white, slicing berries in the gleaming white
kitchen.
“Oh, wow,” I said, following her eyes to the painting in question. A man
made of wavy lines rode atop a horse made of wavy lines.
“It’s like working in a museum,” she said. I looked at her and thought about
Daisy’s observation about uniforms.
“Yeah, it’s a beautiful house,” I said.
“They have a Rauschenberg, too,” she said, “upstairs.” I nodded, although I
didn’t know who that was. Mychal would, probably. “You can go and see.” She
gestured toward the stairs, so I walked up, but didn’t pause to examine the
assemblage of recycled trash at the top of the staircase. Instead, I took a quick
look inside the first open door I came to. It seemed to be Davis’s room,
immaculately clean, lines still in the carpet from a vacuum cleaner. King-size
bed with lots of pillows, and a navy-blue comforter. In a corner of the room, by a
wall of windows, a telescope, pointed up toward the sky. Pictures on his desk of
his family—all from years ago, when he was little. Framed concert posters on
one wall—the Beatles, Thelonious Monk, Otis Redding, Leonard Cohen, Billie
Holiday. A bookshelf packed with hardcover books, with an entire shelf of
comics in plastic sleeves. And on his bedside table, next to a stack of books, the
Iron Man.
I picked it up, turned it over in my hands. The plastic was cracked on the
back of one leg, revealing a hollow space, but the arms and legs still turned.
“Careful,” he said from behind me. “You’re holding the only physical item I
actually love.”
I put the Iron Man down and spun around. “Sorry,” I said.
“Iron Man and I have been through some serious shit together,” he said.
“I have to tell you a secret,” I said. “I’ve always thought Iron Man was kind
of the worst.”
Davis smiled. “Well, it was fun while it lasted, Aza, but our friendship has
come to an end.” I laughed and followed him down the stairs. “Rosa, can you
stay until I get back?”
“Yes, of course,” she said. “I’ve left you some chicken chili and salad for
dinner in the fridge.”
“Thanks,” Davis said. “Noah, my man, I’ll be back in twenty minutes,
cool?”
“Cool,” Noah said, still in outer space.
—
As we walked toward Davis’s Cadillac Escalade, which Daisy was leaning
against, I asked, “Was that your housekeeper?”
“She’s the house manager. Has been since I was born. She’s like what we
have now instead of a parent, kinda.”
“But she doesn’t live with you?”
“No, she leaves every day at six, so not that much like a parent.” Davis
unlocked the doors. Daisy got in the backseat and told me to take shotgun. As I
walked around the front of the car, I noticed Lyle standing next to his golf cart.
He was talking to a man raking up the first fallen leaves of autumn, but staring at
Davis and me.
“Just gonna drop these two off,” Davis told him.
“Be safe, boss,” Lyle answered.
Once the car doors were closed, he said, “Everyone is always watching me.
It’s exhausting.”
“I’m sorry,” I said.
Davis opened his mouth as if to speak, seemed to think better of it, and then,
a moment later, continued. “Like, you know how in middle school or whatever
you feel like everyone is looking at you all the time and secretly talking about
you? It’s like that middle-school feeling, only people really are looking at me
and whispering about me.”
“Maybe they think you know where your dad is,” Daisy said.
“Well, I don’t. And I don’t want to.” He said it firmly, unshakably.
“Why not?” Daisy asked.
I was watching Davis as he spoke, and I saw something in his face flicker
without quite going out. “At this point, the best thing my dad can do for Noah
and me is stay gone. It’s not like he ever took care of us anyway.”
—
Although only the river separated us, it was a ten-minute, winding drive back to
my house because there’s only one bridge in my neighborhood. We were quiet
except for my occasional directions. When we at last pulled into my driveway, I
asked for his phone and typed my number into it. Daisy got out without saying
good-bye, and I was about to do the same, but when I gave him his phone back,
Davis took my right hand and turned it over, palm up. “I remember this,” he
said, and I followed his eyes down to the Band-Aid covering my fingertip. I
pulled my hand away and closed my fingers into a fist.
“Does it hurt?” he asked.
For some reason, I wanted to tell him the truth. “Whether it hurts is kind of
irrelevant.”
“That’s a pretty good life motto,” he said.
I smiled. “Yeah, I don’t know. Okay, I should go.”
Right before I closed the door, he said, “It’s good to see you, Aza.”
“Yeah,” I said. “You too.”
FIVE
AS DAISY AND I DROVE toward her apartment in Harold’s warm embrace, she
wouldn’t shut up about the crush she was certain I had. “Holmesy, you’re aglow.
You’re luminous. You’re beaming.”
“I’m not.”
“You are.”
“I honestly can’t even tell if he’s cute.”
“He’s in that vast boy middle,” she said. “Like, good-looking enough that
I’m willing to be won over. The whole problem with boys is that ninety-nine
percent of them are, like, okay. If you could dress and hygiene them properly,
and make them stand up straight and listen to you and not be dumbasses, they’d
be totally acceptable.”
“I’m really not looking to date anyone.” I know people often say that when
secretly looking for a romantic partner, but I meant it. I definitely felt attracted to
some people, and I liked the idea of being with someone, but the actual
mechanics of it didn’t much suit my talents. Like, parts of typical romantic
relationships that made me anxious included 1. Kissing; 2. Having to say the
right things to avoid hurt feelings; 3. Saying more wrong things while trying to
apologize; 4. Being at a movie theater together and feeling obligated to hold
hands even after your hands become sweaty and the sweat starts mixing
together; and 5. The part where they say, “What are you thinking about?” And
they want you to be, like, “I’m thinking about you, darling,” but you’re actually
thinking about how cows literally could not survive if it weren’t for the bacteria
in their guts, and how that sort of means that cows do not exist as independent
life-forms, but that’s not really something you can say out loud, so you’re
ultimately forced to choose between lying and seeming weird.
“Well, I want to date someone,” Daisy said. “I’d make a go at Little Orphan
Billionaire myself, except he wouldn’t stop looking at you. Hey, speaking of
which, here’s a fascinating piece of trivia: Guess who gets Pickett’s billions if he
dies?”
“Um, Davis and Noah?”
“No,” Daisy said. “Guess again.”
“The zoologist?”
“No.”
“Just tell me.”
“Guess.”
“Fine. You.”
“Alas, no, which is so unjust. I’m such a billionaire without the billions,
Holmesy. I have the soul of a private jet owner, and the life of a public
transportation rider. It’s a real tragedy. But no, not me. Not Davis. Not the
zoologist. The tuatara.”
“Wait, what?”
“The tua-fucking-tara, Holmesy. Malik told me it was a matter of public
record and it totally is. Listen.” She held up her phone. “Indianapolis Star article
from last year. ‘Russell Pickett, the billionaire chairman and founder of Pickett
Engineering, shocked the black-tie audience at last night’s Indianapolis Prize by
announcing that his entire estate would be left to his pet tuatara. Calling the
creatures, which can live to more than one hundred and fifty years of age,
“magical animals,” Pickett said that he had created a foundation to study his
tuatara and provide the best possible care for it. “Through investigating Tua’s
secrets,” he said, referring to his pet by name, “humans will learn the key to
longevity and better understand the evolution of life on earth.” When asked by a
Star reporter to confirm he planned to leave his entire estate to a trust benefitting
a single animal, Pickett confirmed, “My wealth will benefit Tua and only Tua—
until her death. After that, it will go to a trust to benefit all tuatara everywhere.”
A representative of Pickett Engineering said that Pickett’s private affairs had no
bearing on the direction of the company.’ Nothing says fuck you to your kids
quite like leaving your fortune to a lizard.”
“Well, as you’ll recall, it isn’t a lizard,” I pointed out.
“Holmesy, someday you’re going to win the Nobel Prize for Being
Incredibly Pedantic, and I’m going to be so proud of you.”
“Thanks,” I said. I pulled up outside of Daisy’s apartment complex and
parked Harold. “So, if Davis’s dad died, he and his brother get nothing? Don’t
you at least have to pay for your kids to go to college or something?”
“Dunno,” she said, “but it makes me think Davis really would turn his dad in
if he knew where he was.”
“Yeah,” I said. “Someone has to know. He needed help, right? You can’t just
disappear.”
“Right, but there’s so many possible accomplices. Pickett has, like,
thousands of employees. And who knows how many people working on that
property. I mean, they have a zoologist.”
“It would sort of suck, having all those people around your house all day.
Like, people who aren’t in your family just, like, constantly in your space.”
“Indeed, Holmesy, however does one bear the pain of overenthusiastic
servants?” I laughed, and Daisy clapped her hands and said, “Okay. My to-do
list: Research wills. Get police report. Your to-do list: Fall for Davis, which
you’ve already mostly done. Thanks for the ride; time to go pretend I love my
sister.” She grabbed her backpack, climbed out of Harold, and slammed his
precious, fragile door behind her.
—
When I got home, I watched TV with Mom, but I couldn’t stop thinking about
Davis looking down at my finger, holding my hand in his.
I have these thoughts that Dr. Karen Singh calls “intrusives,” but the first
time she said it, I heard “invasives,” which I like better, because, like invasive
weeds, these thoughts seem to arrive at my biosphere from some faraway land,
and then they spread out of control.
Supposedly everyone has them—you look out from over a bridge or
whatever and it occurs to you out of nowhere that you could just jump. And then
if you’re most people, you think, Well, that was a weird thought, and move on
with your life. But for some people, the invasive can kind of take over, crowding
out all the other thoughts until it’s the only one you’re able to have, the thought
you’re perpetually either thinking or distracting yourself from.
You’re watching TV with your mom—this show about time-traveling crime
solvers—and you remember a boy holding your hand, looking at your finger,
and then a thought occurs to you: You should unwrap that Band-Aid and check to
see if there is an infection.
You don’t actually want to do this; it’s just an invasive. Everyone has them.
But you can’t shut yours up. Since you’ve had a reasonable amount of cognitive
behavioral therapy, you tell yourself, I am not my thoughts, even though deep
down you’re not sure what exactly that makes you. Then you tell yourself to
click a little x in the top corner of the thought to make it go away. And maybe it
does for a moment; you’re back in your house, on the couch, next to your mom,
and then your brain says, Well, but wait. What if your finger is infected? Why not
just check? The cafeteria wasn’t exactly the most sanitary place to reopen that
wound. And then you were in the river.
Now you’re nervous, because you’ve previously attended this exact rodeo on
thousands of occasions, and also because you want to choose the thoughts that
are called yours. The river was filthy, after all. Had you gotten some river water
on your hand? It wouldn’t take much. Time to unwrap the Band-Aid. You tell
yourself that you were careful not to touch the water, but your self replies, But
what if you touched something that touched the water, and then you tell yourself
that this wound is almost certainly not infected, but the distance you’ve created
with the almost gets filled by the thought, You need to check for infection; just
check it so we can calm down, and then fine, okay, you excuse yourself to the
bathroom and slip off the Band-Aid to discover that there isn’t blood, but there
might be a bit of moisture on the bandage pad. You hold the Band-Aid up to the
yellow light in the bathroom, and yes, that definitely looks like moisture.
Could be sweat, of course, but also might be water from the river, or worse
still seropurulent drainage, a sure sign of infection, so you find the hand sanitizer
in the medicine cabinet and squeeze some onto your fingertip, which burns like
hell, and then you wash your hands thoroughly, singing your ABCs while you do
to make sure you’ve scrubbed for the full twenty seconds recommended by the
Centers for Disease Control, and then you carefully dry your hands with a towel.
And then you dig your thumbnail all the way into the crack in the callus until it
starts bleeding, and you squeeze the blood out for as long as it comes, and then
you blot the wound dry with a tissue. You take a Band-Aid from inside your
jeans pocket, where there is never a shortage of them, and you carefully reapply
the bandage. You return to the couch to watch TV, and for a few or many
minutes, you feel the shivering jolt of the tension easing, the relief of giving in to
the lesser angels of your nature.
And then two or five or six hundred minutes pass before you start to wonder,
Wait, did I get all the pus out? Was there pus even or was that only sweat? If it
was pus, you might need to drain the wound again.
The spiral tightens, like that, forever.
SIX
AFTER SCHOOL THE NEXT DAY, I joined the swarm of people filing out through the
overstuffed hallways of WRHS and made my way to Harold. I had to change the
Band-Aid, which took a few minutes, but I preferred to let the traffic thin out a
bit before driving home anyway. To kill time, I texted Daisy, asking her to meet
me at Applebee’s, our go-to restaurant for studying together.
She responded a few minutes later: I have work until 8. Meet you after?
Me: Do you need a ride?
Her: Dad picked me up. He’s taking me. Has Davis texted?
Me: No, should I text him?
Her: ABSOLUTELY NOT.
Her: Wait between 24 and 30 hours. Obviously. You’re intrigued but not
obsessed.
Me: Got it. I didn’t know there were Texting Commandments.
Her: Well there are. We’re almost there so I gotta go. First order of
business, drawing straws to see who has to get in the Chuckie costume.
Pray for me.
Harold and I started our drive home, but then it occurred to me that I could
go anywhere. Not anywhere, I guess, but nearly. I could drive to Ohio, if I
wanted, or Kentucky, and still be home before curfew. Thanks to Harold, a
couple hundred square miles of the American Midwest were mine for the taking.
So instead of turning to go home, I kept driving north up Meridian Street until I
merged onto I-465. I turned the radio up as a song I liked called “Can’t Stop
Thinking About You” came on, the bass sizzling in Harold’s long-blown
speakers, the lyrics stupid and silly and everything I needed.
Sometimes you happen across a brilliant run of radio songs, where each time
one station goes to commercial, you scan to another that has just started to play a
song you love but had almost forgotten about, a song you never would’ve picked
but that turns out to be perfect for shouting along to. And so I drove along to one
of those miraculous playlists, headed nowhere. I followed the highway east, and
then south, then west, then north, and then east again, until I ended up at the
same Meridian Street exit where I’d started.
The journey around Indianapolis cost about seven dollars in gas, and I knew
it was wasteful, but I felt so much better after circling the city.
When I parked in the driveway to open up the garage door, I saw I had a
series of texts from Daisy:
I just drew the short straw so I have to get inside the fricking Chuckie
costume.
See you later if I survive.
If I die weep at my grave every day until a seedling appears in the dirt,
then cry on it to make it grow until it becomes a beautiful tree whose
roots surround my body.
They’re making me go now they’re taking away my phone REMEMBER
ME HOLMESY.
Update: I survived. Getting a ride to Applebee’s after work. See you.
—
In the living room, Mom was grading quizzes with her feet up on the coffee
table. I sat down next to her, and without looking up, she said, “A Lyle from the
Pickett estate brought over our canoe today, repaired. Said you and Daisy were
paddling down the White River and hit a rock.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“You and Daisy,” she said. “Paddling on the White River.”
“Yeah,” I said.
She looked up at last. “Seems like something you would only do if, say, you
wanted to run into Davis Pickett.”
I shrugged.
“Did it work?” she asked.
I shrugged again, but she kept looking at me until I gave in and spoke. “I was
just thinking about him. Wanted an excuse to check on him, I guess.”
“How is he doing, without his father?”
“I think he’s okay,” I said. “Most people don’t seem to like their dads much.”
She leaned into me, her shoulder against mine. I knew we were both thinking
about my dad, but we had never been good at talking about him. “I wonder if
you would have clashed with your father.”
I didn’t say anything.
“He would’ve understood you, that’s for sure. He got your whys in a way I
never could. But he was such a worrier, and you might have found that
exhausting. I know I did, sometimes.”
“You worry, too,” I said.
“I suppose. Mostly about you.”
“I don’t mind worriers,” I said. “Worrying is the correct worldview. Life is
worrisome.”
“You sound just like him.” She smiled a little. “I still can’t believe he left
us.” She said it like it was a decision, like he’d been mowing the lawn that day
and thought, I think I’ll fall down dead now.
—
I cooked dinner that night, a macaroni scramble with canned vegetables, boxed
macaroni, and some proper cheddar cheese, and then we ate while watching a
reality show about regular people trying to survive in the wild. My phone finally
buzzed while Mom and I were doing the dishes—Daisy telling me she’d arrived
at Applebee’s—so I told Mom I’d be back by midnight and reunited with
Harold, who was, as always, a pure delight.
Applebee’s is a chain of mid-quality restaurants serving “American food,”
which essentially means that Everything Features Cheese. Last year, some kid
had showed up on our doorstep and talked my mom into buying a huge coupon
book to support his Boy Scout troop or something, and the book turned out to
include sixty Applebee’s coupons offering “Two burgers for $11.” Daisy and I
had been working our way through them ever since.
She was waiting for me at a booth, changed out of her work shirt and into a
scoop-neck turquoise top, staring into the depths of her phone. Daisy didn’t have
a computer, so she did everything on her phone, from texting to writing fan
fiction. She could type on it faster than I could on a regular keyboard.
“Have you ever gotten a dick pic?” she asked in lieu of saying hello.
“Um, I’ve seen one,” I said, scooting into the bench across from her.
“Well, of course you’ve see one, Holmesy. Christ, I’m not asking if you’re a
seventeenth-century nun. I mean have you ever received an unsolicited, nocontext
dick pic. Like, a dick pic as a form of introduction.”
“Not really,” I said.
“Look at this,” she said, and handed me her phone.
“Yeah, that’s a penis,” I said, squinting and turning it slightly
counterclockwise.
“Right, but can we talk about it for a minute?”
“Can we please not?” I dropped the phone as Holly, our server, appeared at
the table. Holly was our server quite regularly, and she wasn’t exactly a cardcarrying
member of the Daisy and Holmesy fan club, possibly on account of our
coupon-driven Applebee’s strategy and limited resources for tipping.
Daisy spoke up, as she always did. “Holly, have you ever received—”
“Nope,” I said. “No no no.” I looked up at Holly. “I’d just like a water with
no food please, but around nine forty-five I’ll take a veggie burger, no
mayonnaise no condiments at all, just a veggie burger and bun in a to-go box
please. With fries.”
“And you’ll have the Blazin’ Texan burger?” Holly asked Daisy.
“With a glass of red wine, please.”
Holly just stared at her.
“Fine. Water.”
“I assume y’all have a coupon?” Holly asked.
“As it happens, we do,” I said, and slid it across the table to her.
Holly had hardly turned away when Daisy started back up. “I mean, how am
I supposed to react to a semi-erect penis as fan mail? Am I supposed to feel
intrigued?”
“He probably thinks it’ll end in marriage. You’ll meet IRL and fall in love
and someday tell your kids that it all started with a picture of a disembodied
penis.”
“It’s just such an odd response to my fiction. Like, okay, follow the thread of
thoughts with me: ‘I really enjoyed this story about Rey and Chewbacca’s
romantic adventure scavenging a wrecked Tulgah spaceship on Endor in search
of the famed Tulgah patience potion; as a thank-you, I believe I will send the
author of that story a photograph of my dick.’ How do you get from A to B,
Holmesy?”
“Boys are gross,” I said. “Everyone is gross. People and their gross bodies; it
all makes me want to barf.”
“Probably just some loser Kylo stan,” she mumbled. I had no understanding
of her fan-fiction language.
“Please can we talk about something else.”
“Fine. During my break at work, I became an expert in wills. So, get this:
You can’t actually leave any money to a nonhuman animal when you die, but
you can leave all your money to a corporation that exists solely to benefit a
nonhuman animal. Basically, the state of Indiana doesn’t consider pets people,
but it does consider corporations people. So Pickett’s money would all go to a
company that benefits the tuatara. And it turns out you don’t have to leave your
kids anything when you die. No matter how rich you are—not a house, not
college money, nothing.”
“What happens if their dad goes to prison?”
“They’d get a guardian. Maybe the house manager or a family member or
something, and that person would get money to pay the kids’ expenses. If finding
fugitives doesn’t work out for me as a career, I might get into guardianship of
billionaire children.
“Okay, you start putting together background files on the case and the
Pickett family. I’m gonna get the police report and also do my calc homework,
because there are only so many hours in a day and I have to spend too many of
them at Chuck E. Cheese.”
“How are you going to get a copy of the police report, anyway?”
“Oh, you know. Wiles,” she said.
—
I happened to be friends with Davis Pickett on Facebook, and while his profile
was a long-abandoned ghost town, it did provide me with one of his usernames
—dallgoodman, which led to an Instagram.
The Instagram contained no real pictures, only quotes rendered in
typewritery fonts with soft-focused, crumpled-paper backgrounds. The first one,
posted two years ago, was from Charlotte Brontë. “I care for myself. The more
solitary, the more friendless, the more unsustained I am, the more I will respect
myself.”
The most recent quote was, “He who doesn’t fear death dies only once,”
which I thought was maybe some veiled reference to his father, but I couldn’t
unpack it. (For the record, he who does fear death also dies only once, but
whatever.)
Scrolling through the quotes, I noticed a few users who consistently liked
Davis’s posts, including one, anniebellcheers, whose feed was mostly
cheerleading pictures until I scrolled back more than a year and found a series of
pictures of her with Davis, featuring a lot of heart emojis.
Their relationship seemed to have started the summer between ninth and
tenth grades and lasted a few months. Her Instagram profile had a link to her
Twitter, where she was still following a user named nkogneato, which turned out
to be Davis’s Twitter handle—I knew because he’d posted a picture of his
brother doing a cannonball into their pool.
The nkogneato username led me to a YouTube profile—the user seemed to
like mostly basketball highlights and those really long videos where you watch
someone play a video game—and then eventually, after scrolling through many
pages of search results, to a blog.
At first, I couldn’t tell for sure if the blog was Davis’s. Each post began with
a quote and then featured a short little paragraph that was never quite
autobiographical enough to place him, like this one:
“At some point in life the world’s beauty becomes enough. You don’t
need to photograph, paint or even remember it. It is enough.” —TONI MORRISON
Last night I lay on the frozen ground, staring up at a clear sky only
somewhat ruined by light pollution and the fog produced by my own
breath—no telescope or anything, just me and the wide-open sky—and I
kept thinking about how sky is a singular noun, as if it’s one thing. But
the sky isn’t one thing. The sky is everything. And last night, it was
enough.
I didn’t know for sure that it was him until I started to notice that many of
the quotes from his Instagram feed were also used in the blog, including the
Charlotte Brontë one:
“I care for myself. The more solitary, the more friendless, the more
unsustained I am, the more I will respect myself.”
—CHARLOTTE BRONTË
At the end, when walking was work, we sat on a bench looking down at
the river, which was running low, and she told me that beauty was
mostly a matter of attention. “The river is beautiful because you are
looking at it,” she said.
Another, written the previous November, around the time he and
anniebellcheers stopped replying to each other on Twitter:
“By convention hot, by convention cold, by convention color, but in
reality atoms and void.”
—DEMOCRITUS
When observation fails to align with a truth, what do you trust—your
senses or your truth? The Greeks didn’t even have a word for blue. The
color didn’t exist to them. Couldn’t see it without a word for it.
I think about her all the time. My stomach flips when I see her. But
is it love, or just something we don’t have a word for?
The next one stopped me cold:
“The greatest weapon against stress is our ability to choose one thought
over another.”
—WILLIAM JAMES
I don’t know what superpower William James enjoyed, but I can no
more choose my thoughts than choose my name.
The way he talked about thoughts was the way I experienced them—not as a
choice but as a destiny. Not a catalog of my consciousness, but a refutation of it.
When I was little, I used to tell Mom about my invasives, and she would
always say, “Just don’t think about that stuff, Aza.” But Davis got it. You can’t
choose. That’s the problem.
The other interesting thing about Davis’s online presence was that everything
ceased the day his father went missing. He’d posted on the blog almost every
day for more than two years, and then on the afternoon after his dad disappeared,
he wrote:
“Sleep tight, ya morons.”
—J. D. SALINGER
I think this is good-bye, my friends, although, then again: No one ever
says good-bye unless they want to see you again.
It made sense. People had probably started snooping around—I mean, if I
could find his secret blog, I imagine the cops could, too. But I wondered whether
Davis had really quit the internet entirely, or whether he’d just decamped to
some farther shore.
I couldn’t pick his trail back up, though. Instead, I got stuck searching his
usernames and variants of them, and ended up meeting a lot of people who
weren’t my Davis Pickett—the fifty-three-year-old Dave Pickett who was a truck
driver in Wisconsin; the Davis Pickett who’d died of ALS after years of posting
short blog entries written with the help of eye-tracking software; a Twitter user
named dallgoodman whose blog was nothing but vitriolic threats directed at
members of Congress. I found a reddit account that commented on Butler
basketball and so probably belonged to Davis, but that, too, had been silent since
Pickett Sr.’s disappearance.
“I’m very close,” Daisy said suddenly. “Very, very close. If only I were as
good at life as I am at the internet.” I looked up, returning to the sensorial plane
of Applebee’s. Daisy was tapping at her phone with one hand while holding her
cup of water with the other. Everything was loud and bright. At the bar, people
were shouting about some sports occurrence. “What’ve you got?” she asked me
as she put down her water.
“Um, Davis had a girlfriend, but they broke up last November-ish. He has a
blog, but hasn’t updated anything since his dad disappeared. I don’t know. In the
blog, he seems . . . sweet, I guess.”
“Well, I’m glad you’ve used your internet detective skills to determine that
Davis is sweet. Holmesy, I love you, but find some info on the case.”
So I did. The Indianapolis Star wrote about Russell Pickett a lot because his
company was one of Indiana’s biggest employers, but also because he was
constantly getting sued. He had some huge real estate deal downtown that
devolved into multiple lawsuits; his former executive assistant and Pickett
Engineering’s chief marketing officer had both sued him for sexual harassment;
he’d been sued by a gardener on his estate for violating the Americans with
Disabilities Act; the list went on and on.
In all those articles, the same lawyer was quoted—Simon Morris. Morris’s
website described his company as “a boutique law firm focusing on the
comprehensive needs of high-net-worth individuals.”
“Can I get a charge off your computer BTW?” She actually said the letters
B-T-W, which I wanted to point out required more syllables than just saying “by
the way,” but she was clearly locked into something. Without ever taking her
eyes from her phone, Daisy reached into her purse, pulled out a USB cable, and
handed it to me. I plugged it into my laptop, and she just mumbled, “That’s
better, thanks; I’m really close here.”
I noticed Holly had come with my to-go order. I cracked the plastic container
and grabbed a couple fries before returning to my investigation of Pickett. I
stumbled onto a website called Glassdoor, where current and former employees
could review the company anonymously. Observations about Russell Pickett
himself included:
“The CEO is skeezy as hell.”
“Russell Pickett is a straight-up megalomaniac.”
“I’m not saying Pickett executives make you break the law, but we do
frequently hear executives start sentences with ‘I’m not saying you
should break the law, but . . .’”
So that’s the kind of guy Pickett was. And although he’d gotten around all
the lawsuits by settling them, the criminal investigation wouldn’t go away. From
what I could gather, the company had bribed a bunch of state officials in
exchange for contracts to build a better sewer overflow system in Indianapolis.
Fifteen years ago, the government had set aside all this money to clean up
the White River by building more sewage retention pools and expanding this
tunnel system that runs underneath downtown, diverting a creek called Pogue’s
Run. The idea was that within a decade, the sewers would stop dumping into the
river every time it rained. Pickett Engineering had gotten the initial contract, but
they’d never finished the work, and it had gone way over budget, so the
government pulled the contract from Pickett’s company and allowed anyone to
bid on finishing the project.
And then, even though they’d done a terrible job the first time, Pickett
Engineering won the new contract—apparently by bribing state officials. Two of
Pickett’s executives had already been arrested and were believed to be
cooperating with the police. Pickett himself hadn’t yet been charged, although an
editorial in the paper from three days before his disappearance criticized the
authorities: “The Indianapolis Star Has Enough Evidence to Indict Russell
Pickett; Why Don’t the Authorities?”
“Annnnddd it’s happening. Okay. Hold on. Hold on. Just waiting for the zip
to download, yes, and opening, and . . . oh, hell yes.” Daisy finally looked up at
me and smiled. Her front teeth were a little crooked, turning toward each other,
and she was self-conscious about it, so she rarely smiled all the way. But now I
could even see her gums. “Can I do the thing, like, at the end of Scooby-Doo and
tell you how I did it?”
I nodded.
“So the first article about Pickett’s disappearance refers to a police report
obtained by the Indianapolis Star. That story was written by Sandra Oliveros,
with additional reporting by this dude Adam Bitterley, which is a bummer of a
last name, but anyway, he’s clearly the junior guy on the story, and a quick
google shows him to be a recent IU grad.
“So I made up an email address that looks almost exactly like Sandra
Oliveros’s and emailed Bitterley an order to send me a copy of the police report.
And he replied, like, ‘I can’t; I don’t have it on my home computer,’ so I told
him to go the hell into the office and email it to me, and he was like, ‘It’s Friday
night,’ and I was, like, ‘I know it’s Friday night, but the news doesn’t stop
breaking on the weekend; do your job, or I’ll find someone else who will do it.’
And then he went to the fucking office and emailed me scans of the fucking
police report.”
“Jesus.”
“Welcome to the future, Holmesy. It’s not about hacking computers
anymore; it’s about hacking human souls. The file is in your email.” Sometimes
I wondered if Daisy was my friend only because she needed a witness.
As the file downloaded, I glanced away from my screen, through the slits of
the blinds to the parking lot outside. A streetlight was shining right at us, which
made everything around it look pitch-black.
I was trying to shake off a thought, but as I opened the police report and
began scanning through it, the thought grew.
“What?” Daisy asked.
“Nothing,” I said, and tried again to swallow the thought. But I couldn’t.
“Just, won’t he get in trouble? Like, when he goes into work on Monday, won’t
he ask his boss why she needed that file, and then won’t she be, like, ‘What file,’
and then won’t he get in trouble? Like, he could get fired.”
Daisy just rolled her eyes, but I was in the spiral now, and I started to worry
that Mr. Bitterley would figure out how to track down Daisy, that he would have
her arrested, and maybe me, too, since I was probably an accomplice. We were
just playing a silly game, but people go to prison all the time for lesser crimes. I
imagined a news story—girl hackers obsessed with billionaire boy.
“He’ll find us,” I said after a while.
“Who?” she asked.
“The guy,” I said. “Bitterley.”
“No, he won’t; I’m on public Wi-Fi in an Applebee’s using an IP address that
locates me in Belo Horizonte, Brazil. And if he does find me, I’ll say you had no
idea what I was doing, and I’ll go to prison for you, and in thanks for my refusal
to snitch, you’ll get my face tattooed on your bicep. It’ll be great.”
“Daisy, be serious.”
“I am being serious. Your skinny little bicep needs a tattoo of my face. Also,
he’s not going to get fired. He’s not going to find us. At most, he will learn an
important lesson about phishing in a way that’s minimally harmful to his life and
the company he works for. Calm down, all right? I gotta get back to this very
important argument I’m having with a stranger on the internet about whether
Chewbacca is a person.”
Holly came by with the check, an unsubtle reminder that we’d overstayed
our welcome. I put down the debit card Mom had given me—Daisy never had
any money and my mom let me charge twenty-five dollars a week as long as I
kept straight As. Beneath the table, I rubbed my thumb against the callus of my
finger. I told myself that Daisy was probably right, that everything would
probably be fine. Probably.
Daisy didn’t look up from her phone, but said, “Seriously, Holmesy. I won’t
let anything happen. I promise.”
“You can’t control it, that’s the thing,” I said. “Life is not something you
wield, you know?”
“Hell yes, it is,” she mumbled, still sunk into her phone. “Ugh, God, now
this guy is saying I write bestiality.”
“Wait, what?”
“Because in my fic, Chewbacca and Rey were in love. He’s saying it is—and
I am quoting—‘criminal’ because it’s interspecies romance. Not sex, even—I
keep it rated Teen for the kids out there—just love.”
“But Chewbacca isn’t human,” I said.
“It’s not a question of whether Chewie was human, Holmesy; it’s a question
of whether he was a person.” She was almost shouting. She took Star Wars stuff
quite seriously. “And he was obviously a person. Like, what even makes you a
person? He had a body and a soul and feelings, and he spoke a language, and he
was an adult, and if he and Rey were in hot, hairy, communicative love, then
let’s just thank God that two consenting, sentient adults found each other in a
dark and broken galaxy.”
So often, nothing could deliver me from fear, but then sometimes, just
listening to Daisy did the trick. She’d straightened something inside me, and I no
longer felt like I was in a whirlpool or walking an ever-tightening spiral. I didn’t
need similes. I was located in my self again. “So he’s a person because he’s
sentient?”
“Nobody complains about male humans hooking up with female Twi’leks!
Because of course men can choose whatever they want to bone. But a human
woman falling in love with a Wookiee, God forbid. I mean, I know I’m just
feeding the trolls here, Holmesy, but I can’t stand for it.”
“I just mean, like, a baby isn’t sentient, but a baby is still a person.”
“Nobody is saying anything about babies, Holmesy. This is about one adult
person who happened to be human falling in love with another adult person who
happened to be a Wookiee.”
“Can Rey even speak Wookiee?”
“You know, it’s a little annoying that you don’t read my fanfic, but what’s
really annoying is that you don’t read any Chewie fanfic. If you did, you’d know
that Wookiee was not a language, it was a species. There were at least three
Wookiee languages. Rey learned Shyriiwook from Wookiees who came to
Jakku, but she didn’t usually speak it because Wookiees mostly understood
Basic.”
I was laughing. “And why are you using the past tense?”
“Because all of this happened a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away,
Holmesy. You always use the past tense when talking about Star Wars. Duh.”
“Wait, can humans speak Shyri—the Wookiee language?”
Daisy did a very passable Chewbacca impersonation in response, then
translated herself. “That was me asking if you’re gonna eat your fries.” I passed
the to-go carton across the table to her, and she took a handful, then made
another Chewbacca noise with her mouth half full.
“What did that mean?” I asked her.
“It’s been over twenty-four hours; time to text Davis.”
“Wookiees have texting?”
“Had texting,” she corrected me.
SEVEN
MONDAY MORNING, I drove Mom to school because her car was in the shop. I
could feel the burning in my middle finger from the hand sanitizer I’d applied
just before leaving, and so I was pressing the Band-Aid into my middle finger,
simultaneously worsening and relieving the pain. I hadn’t texted Davis over the
weekend. I kept thinking about it, but the night at Applebee’s passed, and then
I’d started to feel nervous about it, like maybe it had been too long, and Daisy
wasn’t around to bully me into it because she was working all weekend.
Mom must’ve noticed the Band-Aid pressing, because she said, “You have
an appointment with Dr. Singh tomorrow, don’t you?”
“Yeah.”
“What are your thoughts on the med situation?”
“It’s okay, I guess,” which wasn’t quite the whole truth. For one thing, I
wasn’t convinced the circular white pill was doing anything when I did take it,
and for another, I was not taking it quite as often as I was technically supposed
to. Partly, I kept forgetting, but also there was something else I couldn’t quite
identify, some way-down fear that taking a pill to become myself was wrong.
“You there?” Mom asked.
“Yeah,” I said. Enough of me—but only just enough—was still located
inside Harold to hear her voice, to follow the well-worn path to school.
“Just be honest with Dr. Singh, okay? There’s no need to suffer.” Which I’d
argue is just a fundamental misunderstanding of the human predicament, but
okay.
—
I parked in the student parking lot, parted ways with Mom, and then lined up to
walk through the metal detectors. Once declared weapon-free, I joined the flow
of bodies filling the hallways like blood cells in a vein.
I made it to my locker a few minutes early and took a second to look up the
reporter Daisy had phished, Adam Bitterley. He’d shared a link that morning to a
new story he’d written about a school board voting to ban some book, so I
guessed he hadn’t been fired. Daisy was right—nothing happened.
I was about to head toward class when Mychal jogged up to my locker and
pulled me over to a bench. “How’s it going, Aza?”
“Good,” I said. I was thinking about how part of your self can be in a place
while at the same time the most important parts are in a different place, a place
that can’t be accessed via your senses. Like, how I’d driven all the way to school
without really being inside the car. I was trying to look at Mychal, trying to hear
the clamor of the hallway, but I wasn’t there, not really, not deep down.
“Um,” he said. “So, listen, I don’t want to mess up our friend group, because
it’s really great, but, this is awkward, but do you think, and seriously you can say
no . . .” He trailed off, but I could see where he was going.
“I don’t really think I can date anyone right now,” I said. “I’m, like—”
He cut in. “Well, now it’s super awkward. I was gonna ask if you think Daisy
would go out with me, or if that’s crazy. I mean, you’re great, Aza . . .”
I knew Mychal well enough not to actually die of mortification, but only
just. “Yes,” I said. “Yes. That is a great idea. But you should just talk to her
about it, not me. But yes. By all means, ask her out. I am embarrassed. This has
been an embarrassment. You should ask out Daisy. I am going to stand up and
exit the conversation now with whatever self-respect I still have.”
“I’m really sorry,” he said as I stood up and backed away. “I mean, you’re
beautiful, Aza. It’s not that.”
“No,” I said. “No. Say nothing more. It’s definitely my bad. I’m just . . . I’m
gonna go now. Do ask out Daisy.” Mercifully, a beep rang out from above,
allowing me to scamper off to biology class. Our teacher was late, so everyone
was talking. I hunched down in my seat and immediately texted Daisy.
Me: I thought Mychal was asking me out so I tried to let him down easy
but he was not asking me out. He was asking me if I would ask you out
FOR HIM. Humiliation level—all-time high. But you should say yes.
He’s cute.
Her: Oh God. Panic. He looks like a giant baby.
Me: What?
Her: He looks like a giant baby. Molly Krauss said that once and I’ve
never been able to unsee it. I can’t hook up with a giant baby.
Me: Because of the shaved head?
Her: Because of the everything Holmesy. Because he looks exactly like a
giant baby.
Me: He really doesn’t.
Her: Next time you see him look at him and tell me he does not look like
a giant baby. He looks exactly like if Drake and Beyoncé had a giant
baby.
Me: That would be a hot giant baby.
Her: I’m saving that text in case I ever need to blackmail you. btw HAVE
YOU LOOKED AT THE POLICE REPORT?
Me: Not really, have you?
Her: Yes, even though I had to close yesterday AND Saturday AND I had
this calc stuff that is like reading Sanskrit AND I had to wear the
Chuckie costume like twelve separate times. I didn’t find any clues, but I
did read the whole thing. Even though it’s super boring. I really am the
unsung hero of this investigation.
Me: I think you are fairly sung. I’ll read it today I gotta go Ms. Park is
looking at me weird.
—
Throughout bio, each time Ms. Park turned to the blackboard, I read the missing
persons report from my phone.
The report went on only for a few pages, and over the course of the school
day, I was able to read all of it. The mp (missing person) was fifty-three, male,
gray haired, blue eyed, with a tattoo reading Nolite te bastardes carborundorum
(“Don’t let the bastards get you down,” apparently) on his left shoulder blade,
three small surgical scars in his abdomen from a gallbladder removal, six feet in
height, approximately 220 pounds, last seen wearing his standard sleeping attire:
a horizontally striped navy-and-white nightshirt and light-blue boxer shorts. He
was discovered missing at 5:35 A.M. when the police raided his house in
connection with a corruption investigation.
The report was mostly “witness statements” from witnesses who had not
witnessed anything. Nobody was there that night except Noah and Davis. The
camera at the front entrance had captured two groundskeepers driving away at
5:40 P.M. Malik the Zoologist left that day at 5:52. Lyle left at 6:02, and Rosa at
6:04. So what Lyle told us about Pickett not having nighttime staff seemed true.
One page was devoted to Davis’s witness summary:
Rosa left pizza for us. Noah and I ate while playing a video game
together. Dad came down for a few minutes and sat with us while he ate
pizza, and then went back upstairs. There was nothing unusual. Most
nights I only see Dad for a few minutes, or not at all. He didn’t seem
anxious. It was just a regular day. After Noah and I finished dinner, we
put our dishes in the sink. I helped him with some homework and then
read on the couch for school while he played a video game. I went
upstairs around 10, did some homework in my room, and looked at a
couple stars with my telescope—Vega and Epsilon Lyrae. I went to bed
around 11:00 P.M. Even looking back, there was nothing weird about that
day.
[Witness also stated that he did not observe anything unusual via the
telescope, adding, “My kind of telescope isn’t for looking at the ground.
You’d be seeing everything upside down and backward.”]
Noah’s statement came next:
I played Battlefront for a while with Davis. We had pizza for dinner. Dad
was with us for a bit, talked about how the Cubs are doing. He told
Davis he needed to do a better job of watching out for me, and then
Davis was, like, I’m not his father. He and Dad were always sniping like
that, though. Dad put a hand on my shoulder when he got up to leave,
which felt a little weird. I could really feel him holding on to my
shoulder. It almost hurt. Then he let go and headed upstairs. Davis
helped me with my algebra homework and then I played Battlefront for
another couple hours. I went upstairs around midnight and fell asleep. I
didn’t see Dad after he said good night.
There were also pictures—almost a hundred of them—of every room in the
house.
Nothing appeared disrupted. In Pickett’s office, I saw stacks of papers that
seemed to have been left for an evening, not for a lifetime. A cell phone could be
seen on his bedside table. The carpets were so clean I could see a single set of
footprints leading to Pickett’s desk, and a single set leading away from them.
The closets were full of suits, dozens of them perfectly aligned from lightest
gray to darkest black. A photograph of the kitchen sink showed three dirty
dishes, each with little smudges of pizza grease and tomato sauce. To judge from
the pictures, Pickett didn’t seem to be missing so much as he seemed to have
been raptured.
The report did not, however, contain any mention of the night-vision
photograph, meaning we had something the cops didn’t: a timeline.
—
After school, I got into Harold and screamed when Daisy suddenly appeared in
the backseat. “Shit, you scared me.”
“Sorry,” she said. “I’ve been hiding, because Mychal and I are in the same
history class, and I don’t want to deal with it yet, and also I’ve got a bunch of
comments to reply to. It’s a hard life for a minor fan-fiction author. Did you
notice anything in the police report?”
I was still catching my breath, but eventually said, “They seem to know
slightly less than we do.”
“Yeah,” Daisy said. “Wait. Holmesy, that’s it. That’s it! They know slightly
less than we do!”
“Um, so?”
“The reward is for ‘information leading to the whereabouts of Russell Davis
Pickett.’ We may not know where he is, but we have information they don’t that
will help them find his whereabouts.”
“Or not,” I said.
“We should call. We should call and be, like, hypothetically, if we knew
where Pickett was the night he disappeared, how much would that be worth?
Maybe not the full hundred thousand, but something.”
“Let me talk to Davis about it,” I said. I worried about betraying him, even
though I barely knew him.
“Break hearts, not promises, Holmesy.”
“Just . . . I mean, who knows if they’d even give us money for that, you
know? It’s just a picture. You need a ride to work?”
“As it happens, I do.”
—
While eating dinner with Mom in front of the TV that night, I kept thinking
about the case. What if they did give us a reward? It was valuable information
the police didn’t have. Maybe Davis would hate me, if he ever found out, but
why should I care what some kid from Sad Camp thought of me?
After a while, I begged homework and escaped to my room. I thought maybe
I’d missed something from the police report, so I went through it again and was
still reading when Daisy called me. She started talking before I’d finished saying
“Hi.”
“I had a highly hypothetical conversation with the tip line, and they said that
the reward is coming from the company, not the police, so it’s up to the company
to decide what is relevant, and that the reward would only be given out after they
found Pickett. Our info is definitely relevant, but it’s not like they’ll find Pickett
just with the night-vision picture, so we might have to split the reward with other
people. Or if they never find him, we might not get it. Still, better than nothing.”
“Or exactly equal to nothing, if they don’t find him.”
“Yeah, but it’s evidence. We should at least get part of the reward.”
“If they find him.”
“Crook gets caught. We get paid. I don’t see why you’re waffling here,
Holmesy.”
Just then, my phone buzzed. “I have to go,” I said, and hung up.
I’d gotten a text from Davis: I used to think you should never be friends with
anyone who just wants to be near your money or your access or whatever.
I started typing a response, but then another text came in. Like, never make a
friend who doesn’t like YOU.
I started to type again, but saw the . . . that meant he was still typing, so I
stopped and waited. But maybe the money is just part of me. Maybe that’s who I
am.
A moment later, he added: What’s the difference between who you are and
what you have? Maybe nothing.
At this point I don’t care why someone likes me. I’m just so goddamned
lonely. I know that’s pathetic. But yeah.
I’m lying in a sand trap of my dad’s golf course looking at the sky. I had
kind of a shitty day. Sorry for all these texts.
I got under the covers and wrote him back. Hi.
Him: I told you I was bad at chitchat. Right. That’s how you start a
conversation. Hi.
Me: You’re not your money.
Him: Then what am I? What is anyone?
Me: I is the hardest word to define.
Him: Maybe you are what you can’t not be.
Me: Maybe. How’s the sky?
Him: Great. Huge. Amazing.
Me: I like being outside at night. It gives me this weird feeling, like I’m
homesick but not for home. It’s kind of a good feeling, though.
Him: I am drenched in that feeling at the moment. Are you outside?
Me: I’m in bed.
Him: Light pollution makes naked eye stargazing suck here, but I can see
all eight stars in the Big Dipper right now, if you include Alcor.
Me: What was shitty about your day?
I watched the . . . and waited. He wrote for a long time, and I imagined him
typing and deleting, typing and deleting.
Him: I’m all alone out here, I guess.
Me: What about Noah?
Him: He’s all alone, too. That’s the worst part. I don’t know how to talk
to him. I don’t know how to make it stop hurting. He’s not doing any
homework. I can’t even get him to take a shower regularly. Like, he’s not
a little kid. I can’t MAKE him do stuff.
Me: If I knew something...like, something about your dad? And I told,
would that make it better or worse?
He was typing for a long time. Much worse, came the reply at last.
Me: Why?
Him: Two reasons: If Noah can be eighteen or sixteen or even fourteen
when he has to watch his father go to jail, that will be better than it
happening when he’s thirteen. Also, if Dad gets caught because he tries
to contact us, that will be okay. But if he gets caught despite NOT
reaching out to us, Noah will be completely crushed. He still thinks our
dad loves us and all that.
For a moment, and only for a moment, I entertained the notion that Davis
might’ve helped his father disappear. But I couldn’t see Davis as his father’s
accomplice.
Me: I’m sorry. I won’t say anything. Don’t worry.
Him: Today is our mom’s birthday, but Noah barely knew her. It’s all just
so different for him.
Me: Sorry.
Him: And the thing is, when you lose someone, you realize you’ll
eventually lose everyone.
Me: True. And once you know that, you can never forget it.
Him: Clouds are blowing in. I should go to bed. Good night, Aza.
Me: Good night.
I put the phone on my bedside table and pulled my blanket up over me,
thinking about the big sky over Davis and the weight of the covers on me,
thinking about his father and mine. Davis was right: Everybody disappears
eventually.
EIGHT
DAISY WAS STANDING NEXT TO MY PARKING SPOT when Harold and I arrived at
school the next morning. Summer doesn’t last in Indianapolis, and even though
it was still September, Daisy was underdressed for the weather in a short-sleeve
top and skirt.
“I have a crisis,” she announced once I was out of the car. As we walked
through the parking lot, she explained. “So last night, Mychal called to ask me
out, and I could’ve handled myself via text but you know I get nervous on the
phone, plus I remain unsure Mychal can handle all . . . this,” she said, gesturing
vaguely at herself. “I am willing to give the giant baby a chance. But in a
flustered moment, not wanting to commit to a full-on proper date, I may have
suggested he and I go on a double date with you and Davis.”
“You did not,” I said.
“And then he was, like, ‘Aza said she wasn’t looking for a relationship,’ and
I was, like, ‘Well, she already has a crush on this dude who goes to Aspen Hall,’
and then he was, like, ‘The billionaire’s kid,’ and I was, like, ‘Yeah,’ and then he
was, like, ‘I can’t believe I got fake rejected by someone for a fake reason.’ But
anyway, on Friday night, you and me and Davis and a man-size baby are having
a picnic.”
“A picnic?”
“Yeah, it’ll be great.”
“I don’t like eating outside,” I said. “Why can’t we just go to Applebee’s and
use two coupons instead of one?”
She stopped and turned to me. We were on the steps outside school, people
all around us, and I worried we might get trampled, but Daisy had the ability to
part seas. People made room for her. “Let me list my concerns here,” she said.
“One: I don’t want to be alone with Mychal on our first and probably only date.
Two: I have already told him you have a crush on a guy from Aspen Hall. I can’t
unsay that. Three: I have not actually made out with a human being in months.
Four: Therefore, I am nervous about the whole thing and want my best friend
there. You will note that nowhere in my top four concerns is whether we picnic,
so if you want to move this mofo to Applebee’s, that is A-OK by me.”
I thought about it for a second. “I’ll try,” I said. So I texted Davis while
waiting for the second bell to ring and commence biology.
Couple friends are getting dinner at Applebee’s at 86th and Ditch on
Friday. Are you free?
He wrote back immediately. I am. Pick you up or meet you there?
Meet us there. Does seven work?
Sure. See you then.
—
After school that day, I had an appointment with Dr. Singh in her windowless
office in the immense Indiana University North Hospital up in Carmel. Mom
offered to drive me, but I wanted some time alone with Harold.
The whole way up, I thought about what I’d say to Dr. Singh. I can’t
properly think and listen to the radio at the same time, so it was quiet in the car,
except for the thumping rumble of Harold’s mechanical heart. I wanted to tell
her that I was getting better, because that was supposed to be the narrative of
illness: It was a hurdle you jumped over, or a battle you won. Illness is a story
told in the past tense.
“How are you?” she asked as I sat down. The walls in Dr. Singh’s office
were bare except for this one small picture of a fisherman standing on a beach
with a net slung over his shoulder. It looked like stock photography, like the
picture that came free with the frame. She didn’t even have any diplomas up on
the wall.
“I feel like I might not be driving the bus of my consciousness,” I said.
“Not in control,” she said.
“I guess.”
Her legs were crossed, and her left foot was tapping the ground like it was
trying to send a Morse code SOS. Dr. Karen Singh was in constant motion, like a
badly drawn cartoon, but she had the single greatest resting poker face I’d ever
seen. She never betrayed disgust or surprise. I remember when I told her that I
sometimes imagine ripping my middle finger off and stomping on it, she said,
“Because your pain has a locus there,” and I said, “Maybe,” and she shrugged
and said, “That’s not uncommon.”
“Has there been an uptick in your rumination or intrusive thoughts?”
“I don’t know. They continue to intrude.”
“When did you put that Band-Aid on?”
“I don’t know,” I lied. She stared at me, unblinking. “After lunch.”
“And with your fear of C. diff?”
“I don’t know. Sometimes it happens.”
“Do you feel that you’re able to resist the—”
“No,” I said. “I mean, I’m still crazy, if that’s what you’re asking. There has
been no change on the being crazy front.”
“I’ve noticed you use that word a lot, crazy. And you sound angry when you
say it, almost like you’re calling yourself a name.”
“Well, everyone’s crazy these days, Dr. Singh. Adolescent sanity is so
twentieth century.”
“It sounds to me like you’re being cruel to yourself.”
After a moment, I said, “How can you be anything to your self? I mean, if
you can be something to your self, then your self isn’t, like, singular.”
“You’re deflecting.” I just stared at her. “You’re right that self isn’t simple,
Aza. Maybe it’s not even singular. Self is a plurality, but pluralities can also be
integrated, right? Think of a rainbow. It’s one arc of light, but also seven
differently colored arcs of light.”
“Okay, well, I feel more like seven things than one thing.”
“Do you feel like your thought patterns are impeding your daily life?”
“Uh, yeah,” I said.
“Can you give me an example?”
“I don’t know, like, I’ll be at the cafeteria and I’ll start thinking about how,
like, there are all these things living inside of me that eat my food for me, and
how I sort of am them, in a way—like, I’m not a human person so much as this
disgusting, teeming blob of bacteria, and there’s not really any getting myself
clean, you know, because the dirtiness goes all the way through me. Like, I can’t
find the deep down part of me that’s pure or unsullied or whatever, the part of
me where my soul is supposed to be. Which means that I have maybe, like, no
more of a soul than the bacteria do.”
“That’s not uncommon,” she said. Her catchphrase. Dr. Singh then asked if I
was willing to try exposure response therapy again, which I’d done back when I
first started seeing her. Basically I had to do stuff like touch my callused finger
against a dirty surface and then not clean it or put a Band-Aid on. It had sort of
worked for a while, but now all I could remember was how scared it had made
me, and I couldn’t bear the thought of being that scared again, so I just shook my
head no at the mention of it. “Are you taking your Lexapro?” she asked.
“Yeah,” I said. She just stared at me. “It freaks me out some to take it, so not
every day.”
“Freaks you out?”
“I don’t know.” She kept watching me, her foot tapping. The air felt dead in
the room. “If taking a pill makes you different, like, if it changes the way-down
you . . . that’s just a screwed-up idea, you know? Who’s deciding what me
means—me or the employees of the factory that makes Lexapro? It’s like I have
this demon inside of me, and I want it gone, but the idea of removing it via pill
is . . . I don’t know . . . weird. But a lot of days I get over that, because I do
really hate the demon.”
“You often try to understand your experience through metaphor, Aza: It’s
like a demon inside of you; you’ll call your consciousness a bus, or a prison cell,
or a spiral, or a whirlpool, or a loop, or a—I think you once called it a scribbled
circle, which I found interesting.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“One of the challenges with pain—physical or psychic—is that we can really
only approach it through metaphor. It can’t be represented the way a table or a
body can. In some ways, pain is the opposite of language.”
She turned to her computer, shook her mouse to wake it up, and then clicked
an image on her desktop. “I want to share something Virginia Woolf wrote:
‘English, which can express the thoughts of Hamlet and the tragedy of Lear, has
no words for the shiver and the headache. . . . The merest schoolgirl, when she
falls in love, has Shakespeare or Keats to speak her mind for her; but let a
sufferer try to describe a pain in his head to a doctor and language at once runs
dry.’ And we’re such language-based creatures that to some extent we cannot
know what we cannot name. And so we assume it isn’t real. We refer to it with
catch-all terms, like crazy or chronic pain, terms that both ostracize and
minimize. The term chronic pain captures nothing of the grinding, constant,
ceaseless, inescapable hurt. And the term crazy arrives at us with none of the
terror and worry you live with. Nor do either of those terms connote the courage
people in such pains exemplify, which is why I’d ask you to frame your mental
health around a word other than crazy.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Can you say that? Can you say that you’re courageous?”
I screwed up my face at her. “Don’t make me do that therapy stuff,” I said.
“That therapy stuff works.”
“I am a brave warrior in my internal Battle of Valhalla,” I deadpanned.
She almost smiled. “Let’s talk about a plan to take that medication every
single day,” she said, and then proceeded to talk about mornings versus
evenings, and how we could also try to get off the medication and try a different
one, but that might be best attempted during a less stressful period, like summer
vacation, and on and on.
Meanwhile, for some reason I felt a twinge in my stomach. Probably just
nerves from listening to Dr. Singh talk about dosages. But that’s also how C. diff
starts—your stomach hurts because a few bad bacteria have managed to take
hold in your small intestine, and then your gut ruptures and seventy-two hours
later you’re dead.
I needed to reread that case study of the woman who had no symptoms
except a stomachache and turned out to have C. diff. Can’t get out my phone
right now, though—she’ll get pissed off—but did that woman have some other
symptom at least, or am I exactly like her? Another twinge. Did she have a
fever? Couldn’t remember. Shit. It’s happening. You’re sweating now. She can
tell. Should you tell her? She’s a doctor. Maybe you should tell her.
“My stomach hurts a little,” I said.
“You don’t have C. diff,” she answered.
I nodded and swallowed, then said in a small voice, “I mean, you don’t know
that.”
“Aza, are you having diarrhea?”
“No.”
“Have you recently taken antibiotics?”
“No.”
“Have you been hospitalized recently?”
“No.”
“You don’t have C. diff.”
I nodded, but she wasn’t a gastroenterologist, and anyway, I literally knew
more about C. diff than she did. Almost 30 percent of people who died of C. diff
didn’t acquire it in a hospital, and over 20 percent didn’t have diarrhea. Dr.
Singh returned to the medication conversation, and as I half listened, I started
thinking I might throw up. My stomach really hurt now, like it was twisting in on
itself, like the trillions of bacteria within me were making room for a new
species in town, the one that would rip me apart from the inside out.
The sweat was pouring out of me. If I could just confirm that case study. Dr.
Karen Singh saw what was happening.
“Should we try a breathing exercise?” And so we did, inhaling deeply and
then exhaling as if to flicker the candle but not extinguish it.
She told me she wanted to see me in ten days. You can kind of measure how
crazy you are based on how soon they want to see you back. Last year, for a
while, I’d been at eight weeks. Now, less than two.
On the walk from her office to Harold, I looked up the case report. That
woman, she did have a fever. I told myself to feel relieved, and maybe I did for a
little while, but by the time I got home, I could hear the whisper starting up
again, that something was definitely wrong with my stomach since the gnawing
ache wouldn’t go away.
I think, You will never be free from this.
I think, You don’t pick your thoughts.
I think, You are dying, and there are bugs inside of you that will eat through
your skin.
I think and I think and I think.
NINE
BUT I ALSO HAD A LIFE, a normal-ish life, which continued. For hours or days, the
thoughts would leave me be, and I could remember something my mom told me
once: Your now is not your forever. I went to class, got good grades, wrote
papers, talked to Mom after lunch, ate dinner, watched television, read. I was not
always stuck inside myself, or inside my selves. I wasn’t only crazy.
On date night, I got home from school and spent a solid two hours getting
dressed. It was a cloudless day in late September, cold enough to justify a coat,
but warm enough that a sleeved dress with tights could be managed. Then again,
that might seem like trying, and texting Daisy was no help because she
responded she was going to wear an evening gown, and I couldn’t totally tell if
she was kidding.
In the end, I went for my favorite jeans and a hoodie over a lavender T-shirt
Daisy had given me featuring Han Solo and Chewbacca in a fierce embrace.
I then spent another half hour applying and unapplying makeup. I’m not the
sort of person who usually gets carried away with that stuff, but I was nervous,
and sometimes makeup feels kind of like armor.
“Are you wearing eyeliner?” Mom asked when I emerged from my room.
She was sorting through bills and had spread them out across the entire coffee
table. The pen she held hovered over a checkbook.
“A little,” I said. “Does it look weird?”
“Just different,” Mom said, failing to disguise her disapproval. “Where are
you headed?”
“Applebee’s with Daisy and Davis and Mychal. Back by midnight.”
“Is this for a date?”
“It’s dinner,” I said.
“Are you dating Davis Pickett?”
“We are both eating dinner at the same restaurant at the same time. It’s not
marriage.”
She gestured at the spot next to her on the couch. “I’m supposed to be there
at seven,” I said. She pointed at the couch again. I sat down, and she put her arm
around me.
“You don’t talk much to your mother.”
Dr. Singh told me once that if you have a perfectly tuned guitar and a
perfectly tuned violin in the same room, and you pluck the D string of the guitar,
then all the way across the room, the D string on the violin will also vibrate. I
could always feel my mother’s vibrating strings. “I also don’t talk much to other
people.”
“I want you to be careful about that Davis Pickett, okay? Wealth is careless
—so around it, you must be careful.”
“He’s not wealth. He’s a person.”
“People can be careless, too.” She squeezed me so tight it felt like she was
pressing the breath out of me. “Just be careful.”
—
I was the last to arrive, and the remaining space was next to Mychal, across from
Davis, who was wearing a plaid button-down, nicely ironed, sleeves rolled up
just so, exposing his forearms. I’m not sure why, but I’ve always been pretty
keen on the male forearm.
“Cool shirt,” Davis said.
“Birthday present from Daisy,” I said.
“You know, some people think it’s bestiality, for a Wookiee to love a
human,” Daisy said.
Mychal sighed. “Don’t get her started on the whole Are-Wookiees-people
thing.”
“That’s actually the most fascinating thing about Star Wars,” said Davis.
Mychal groaned. “Oh God. It’s happening.” Daisy immediately launched
into a defense of Wookiee-human love. “You know, for a moment in Star Wars
Apocrypha, Han was actually married to a Wookiee, but does anyone freak out
about that?” Davis was leaning forward, listening intently. He was smaller than
Mychal, but he took up more room—Davis’s gangly limbs occupied space like
an army holds territory.
Davis and Daisy were chatting back and forth about the dehumanization of
Clone troopers, and Mychal jumped in to explain that Daisy was actually kind of
a famous writer of Star Wars fan fiction. Davis looked her username up on his
phone and was impressed by the two thousand reads on her most recent story,
and then they were all laughing about some Star Wars joke I couldn’t quite
follow.
“Waters for everyone,” Daisy said when Holly arrived to take our drink
order.
Davis turned to me and said, “They don’t have Dr Pepper?”
“Soft drinks aren’t covered by the coupon,” Holly explained, monotone.
“But also, no. We have Pepsi.”
“Well, I think we can spring for a round of Pepsis,” he said.
I realized in the silence that followed that I hadn’t spoken since answering
Davis’s compliment about my shirt. Davis, Daisy, and Mychal eventually went
back to talking about Star Wars and the size of the universe and traveling faster
than light. “Star Wars is the American religion,” Davis said at one point, and
Mychal said, “I think religion is the American religion,” and even though I
laughed with them, it felt like I was watching the whole thing from somewhere
else, like I was watching a movie about my life instead of living it.
After a while, I heard my name and snapped into my body, seated at
Applebee’s, my back against the green vinyl cushion, the smell of fried food, the
din of conversation pressing in from all around me. “Holmesy has a Facebook,”
Daisy said, “but her last status update is from middle school.” She shot me a
look that I couldn’t quite interpret, and then said, “Holmesy’s like a grandmother
when it comes to the internet.” She paused again. “Aren’t you?” she said
pointedly, and then I realized at last she was trying to make room for me to talk.
“I use the internet. I just don’t feel a need to, like, contribute to it.”
“It does feel like the internet already contains plenty of information,” Davis
allowed.
“Wrong,” Daisy said. “For instance, there is very little high-quality romantic
Chewbacca fic on the internet, and I am just one person, who can only write so
much. The world needs Holmesy’s Wookiee love stories.” There was a brief
pause in the conversation. I felt my arms prickling with nervousness, sweat
glands threatening to burst open. And then they went back to talking, the
conversation shifting this way and that, everyone telling stories, talking over one
another, laughing. I tried to smile and shake my head at the right times, but I was
always a moment behind the rest of them. They laughed because something was
funny; I laughed because they had.
I didn’t feel hungry, but when our food arrived I picked at my veggie burger
with a knife and fork to make it look like I was eating more than I could actually
stomach. Eating quieted the conversation for a while, until Holly dropped off the
check, which I picked up.
Davis reached across the table and put his hand on top of mine. “Please,” he
said. “It is not an inconvenience to me.” I let him take it.
“We should do something,” Daisy said. I was ready to go home, eat
something in private, and go to sleep. “Let’s go to a movie or something.”
“We can just watch one at my house,” Davis said. “We get all the movies.”
Mychal’s head tilted. “What do you mean you ‘get all the movies’?”
“I mean, we get all the movies that go to theaters. We have a screening room,
and we . . . just pay for them or whatever. I actually don’t know how it works.”
“You mean, when a movie comes out in theaters, it . . . also comes out at
your house?”
“Yeah,” Davis said. “When I was a kid, we had to have a projectionist come
out, but now it’s all digital.”
“Like, inside your house?” Mychal asked, still confused.
“Yeah, I’ll show you,” Davis said.
Daisy looked over at me. “You up for it, Holmesy?” I contracted my face
into a smile and nodded.
—
I drove Harold to Davis’s house; Daisy drove with Mychal in his parents’
minivan, and Davis led in his Escalade. Our little caravan headed west on
Eighty-Sixth Street to Michigan Road, and then followed it down past Walmart,
past the pawnshops and payday loan outfits to the gates of Davis’s estate across
the road from the art museum. The Pickett estate wasn’t in a nice neighborhood,
exactly, but it was so gigantic that it functioned as a neighborhood unto itself.
The gate opened, and we followed Davis to a parking lot beside the glass
mansion. The house looked even more amazing in the dark. Through the walls, I
could see the whole kitchen suffused with gold light.
Mychal ran up to me as I exited Harold. “Do you know—oh my God, I’ve
always wanted to see this house. This is Tu-Quyen Pham, you know.”
“Who?”
“The architect,” he said. “Tu-Quyen Pham. She’s crazy famous. She’s only
designed three residences in the U.S. Oh my God, I can’t believe I am seeing
this.” We followed him into the house, and Mychal exclaimed a series of artist
names. “Pettibon! Picasso! Oh my God, that’s KERRY JAMES MARSHALL.” I
only knew who Picasso was.
“Yeah, I actually pressed Dad to buy that one,” Davis said. “Couple years
ago, he took me to an art fair in Miami Beach. I really love KJM’s work.” I
noticed Noah was lying on the same couch, playing what appeared to be the
same video game. “Noah, these are my friends. Friends, Noah.”
“’Sup,” Noah said.
“Is it okay if I just, like, walk around?” Mychal asked.
“Yeah, of course. Check out the Rauschenberg combine upstairs.”
“No way,” Mychal said, and charged up the stairs, Daisy trailing behind him.
I found myself pulled toward the painting that Mychal had called “Pettibon.”
It was a colorful spiral, or maybe a multicolored rose, or a whirlpool. By some
trick of the curved lines, my eyes got lost in the painting so that I kept having to
refocus on tiny individual pieces of it. It didn’t feel like something I was looking
at so much as something I was part of. I felt, and then dismissed, an urge to grab
the painting off the wall and run away with it.
I jumped a little when Davis placed his hand on the small of my back.
“Raymond Pettibon. He’s most famous for his paintings of surfers, but I like his
spirals. He was a punk musician before he became an artist. He was in Black
Flag before it was Black Flag.”
“I don’t know what Black Flag is,” I said.
He pulled out his phone and tapped around a bit, and then a screeching wave
of sound, complete with a screaming, gravelly voice, filled the room from
speakers above. “That’s Black Flag,” he said, then used his phone to stop the
music. “Want to see the theater?”
I nodded, and he took me downstairs to the basement, except it wasn’t really
a basement because the ceilings were like fifteen feet high. We walked down the
hallway to a bookshelf lined with hardcover books. “My dad’s collection of first
editions,” he said. “We’re not allowed to read any of them, of course. The oil
from human hands damages them. But you can take out this one,” he said, and
pointed at a hardcover copy of Tender Is the Night.
I reached for it, and the moment my hand touched the spine, the bookshelf
parted in the middle and opened inward to reveal the theater, which had six
stadium-style rows of black leather seats. “By F. Scott Fitzgerald,” Davis
explained, “whose full name was Francis Scott Key Fitzgerald.” I didn’t say
anything; I couldn’t get over the size of the movie screen. “It’s probably obvious
how hard I’m trying to impress you,” he said.
“Well, it’s not working. I always hang out in mansions with hidden movie
theaters.”
“Want to watch something? Or we could go for a walk? There’s something I
want to show you outside.”
“We shouldn’t abandon Daisy and Mychal.”
“I’ll let them know.” He fiddled around on his phone for a second and then
spoke into it. “We’re going for a walk. Make yourselves at home. Theater’s in
the basement if you’re interested.”
A moment later, his voice began playing over the speakers, repeating what
he’d just said. “I could’ve just texted her,” I said.
“Yeah, but that wouldn’t have been as awesome.”
—
I zipped up my hoodie and followed Davis outside. We walked in silence down
one of the asphalt golf paths, past the pool, which was lit from inside the water,
slowly changing colors from red to orange to yellow to green. The light cast an
eerie glow up onto the windows of the terrarium that reminded me of pictures of
the northern lights.
We kept walking until we reached one of the oblong sand bunkers of the golf
course. Davis lay down inside of it, his head resting on its grassy lip. I lay down
next to him, our jackets touching without our skin touching. He pointed up at the
sky and said, “So the light pollution is terrible, but the brightest star you see—
there, see it?” I nodded. “That’s not a star. That’s Jupiter. But Jupiter is, like,
depending on orbits and stuff, between three hundred sixty and six hundred
seventy million miles away. Right now, it’s around five hundred million miles,
which is around forty-five light-minutes. You know what light-time is?”
“Kinda,” I said.
“It means if we were traveling at the speed of light, it would take us fortyfive
minutes to get from Earth to Jupiter, so the Jupiter we’re seeing right now is
actually Jupiter forty-five minutes ago. But, like, just above the trees there, those
five stars that kind of make a crooked W?”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Right, that’s Cassiopeia. And the crazy thing is, the star on the top, Caph—
it’s 55 light-years away. Then there’s Shedar, which is 230 light-years away. And
then Navi, which is 550 light-years away. It’s not only that we aren’t close to
them; they aren’t close to one another. For all we know, Navi blew up five
hundred years ago.”
“Wow,” I said. “So, you’re looking at the past.”
“Yeah, exactly.” I felt him fumbling for something—his phone, maybe—and
then glanced down and realized he was trying to hold my hand. I took it. We
were quiet beneath the old light above us. I was thinking about how the sky—at
least this sky—wasn’t actually black. The real darkness was in the trees, which
could be seen only in silhouette. The trees were shadows of themselves against
the rich silver-blue of the night sky.
I heard him turn his head toward me and could feel him looking at me. I
wondered why I wanted him to kiss me, and how to know why you want to be
with someone, how to disentangle the messy knots of wanting. And I wondered
why I was scared to turn my head toward him.
Davis started talking about the stars again—as the night got darker, I could
see more and more of them, faint and wobbly, just teetering on the edge of
visibility—and he was telling me about light pollution and how I could see the
stars moving if I waited long enough, and how some Greek philosopher thought
the stars were pinpricks in a cosmic shroud. Then, after he fell quiet for a
moment, he said, “You don’t talk much, Aza.”
“I’m never sure what to say.”
He mimicked me from the day we’d met again by the pool. “Try saying what
you’re thinking. That’s something I never ever do.”
I told him the truth. “I’m thinking about mere organism stuff.”
“What stuff?”
“I can’t explain it,” I said.
“Try me.”
I looked over at him now. Everyone always celebrates the easy attractiveness
of green or blue eyes, but there was a depth to Davis’s brown eyes that you just
don’t get from lighter colors, and the way he looked at me made me feel like
there was something worthwhile in the brown of my eyes, too.
“I guess I just don’t like having to live inside of a body? If that makes sense.
And I think maybe deep down I am just an instrument that exists to turn oxygen
into carbon dioxide, just like merely an organism in this . . . vastness. And it’s
kind of terrifying to me that what I think of as, like, my quote unquote self isn’t
really under my control? Like, as I’m sure you’ve noticed, my hand is sweating
right now, even though it’s too cold for sweating, and I really hate that once I
start sweating I can’t stop, and then I can’t think about anything else except for
how I’m sweating. And if you can’t pick what you do or think about, then maybe
you aren’t really real, you know? Maybe I’m just a lie that I’m whispering to
myself.”
“I can’t tell that you’re sweating at all, actually. But I bet that doesn’t help.”
“Yeah, it doesn’t.” I took my hand from his and wiped it on my jeans, then
wiped my face with the sleeve of my hoodie. I disgusted myself. I was revolting,
but I couldn’t recoil from my self because I was stuck inside of it. I thought
about how the smell of your sweat isn’t from sweat itself, but from the bacteria
that eat it.
I started telling Davis about this weird parasite, Diplostomum
pseudospathaceum. It matures in the eyes of fish, but can only reproduce inside
the stomach of a bird. Fish infected with immature parasites swim in deep water
to make it harder for birds to spot, but then, once the parasite is ready to mate,
the infected fish suddenly start swimming close to the surface. They start trying
to get themselves eaten by a bird, basically, and eventually they succeed, and the
parasite that was authoring the story all along ends up exactly where it needs to
be: in the belly of a bird. The parasite breeds there, and then baby parasites get
crapped out into the water by birds, whereupon they meet with a fish, and the
cycle begins anew.
I was trying to explain to him why this freaked me out so much but not really
succeeding, and I recognized that I’d pulled the conversation very far away from
the point where we’d held hands and been close to kissing, that now I was
talking about parasite-infected bird feces, which was more or less the opposite of
romance, but I couldn’t stop myself, because I wanted him to understand that I
felt like the fish, like my whole story was written by someone else.
I even told him something I’d never actually said to Daisy or Dr. Singh or
anybody—that the pressing of my thumbnail against my fingertip had started off
as a way of convincing myself that I was real. As a kid, my mom had told me
that if you pinch yourself and don’t wake up, you can be sure that you’re not
dreaming; and so every time I thought maybe I wasn’t real, I would dig my nail
into my fingertip, and I would feel the pain, and for a second I’d think, Of course
I’m real. But the fish can feel pain, is the thing. You can’t know whether you’re
doing the bidding of some parasite, not really.
After I said all that, we were quiet for a long time, until finally he said, “My
mom was in the hospital for, like, six months after her aneurysm. Did you know
that?” I shook my head. “I guess she was kind of in a coma or whatever—like,
she couldn’t talk or anything, or feed herself, but sometimes if you put your hand
in her hand, she would squeeze.
“Noah was too young to visit much, but I got to. Every single day after
school, Rosa would take me to the hospital and I would lie in bed with her and
we would watch Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles on the TV in her room.
“Her eyes were open and everything, and she could breathe by herself, and I
would lie there next to her and watch TMNT, and I would always have the Iron
Man in my hand, my fingers squeezed into a fist around it, and I would put my
fist in her hand and wait, and sometimes she would squeeze, her fist around my
fist, and when it happened, it made me feel . . . I don’t know . . . loved, I guess.
“Anyway, I remember once Dad came, and he stood against the wall at the
edge of the room like she was contagious or something. At one point, she
squeezed my hand, and I told him. I told him she was holding my hand, and he
said, ‘It’s just a reflex,’ and I said, ‘She’s holding my hand, Dad, look.’ And he
said, ‘She’s not in there, Davis. She’s not in there anymore.’
“But that’s not how it works, Aza. She was still real. She was still alive. She
was as much a person as any other person; you’re real, but not because of your
body or because of your thoughts.”
“Then what?” I said.
He sighed. “I don’t know.”
“Thanks for telling me that,” I said. I’d turned to him and was looking at his
face in profile. Sometimes, Davis looked like a boy—pale skin, acne on his chin.
But now he looked handsome. The silence between us grew uncomfortable until
eventually I asked him the stupidest question, because I actually wanted to know
its answer. “What are you thinking?”
“I’m thinking it’s too good to be true,” he said.
“What is?”
“You.”
“Oh.” And then after a second, I added, “Nobody ever says anything is too
bad to be true.”
“I know you saw the picture. The night-vision picture.” I didn’t answer, so
he continued. “That’s the thing you know, that you want to tell the cops. Did
they offer you a reward for it?”
“I’m not here looking for—” I said.
“But how can I ever know that, Aza? How will I ever know? With anyone?
Did you give it to them yet?”
“No, we won’t. Daisy wants to, but I won’t let her. I promise.”
“I can’t know that,” he said. “I keep trying to forget it, but I can’t.”
“I don’t want the reward,” I said, but even I didn’t know if I meant it.
“Being vulnerable is asking to get used.”
“That’s true for anybody, though,” I said. “It’s not even important. It’s just a
picture. It doesn’t say anything about where he is.”
“It gives them a time and a place. You’re right, though. They won’t find him.
But they will ask me why I didn’t turn over that picture. And they’ll never
believe me, because I don’t have a good reason. It’s just that I don’t want to deal
with kids at school while he’s on trial. I don’t want Noah to have to deal with
that. I want . . . for everything to be like it was. And him gone is closer to that
than him in jail. The truth is, he didn’t tell me he was leaving. But if he had, I
wouldn’t have stopped him.”
“Even if we gave them that picture, it’s not like they’re going to arrest you or
anything.”
Suddenly, Davis stood up and took off across the golf course. “This is a
completely solvable problem,” I heard him say to himself.
I followed him up the walkway to the cottage, and we went inside. It was a
rustic cabin with wood paneling everywhere, high ceilings, and an astonishing
variety of animal heads on the walls. A plaid, overstuffed couch and matching
chairs formed a semicircle facing a massive fireplace.
Davis walked over to the bar area, opened the cabinet above the sink, pulled
out a box of Honey Nut Cheerios, and started shaking out its contents. A few
Cheerios poured out of the box into the sink, and then a bundle of bills banded
with a strip of paper. I stepped forward and saw that the wrapping read
“$10,000,” which seemed impossible, because the stack was so small—a
quarter-inch high at the most. Another stack came out of the Cheerios box, and
then another. He reached up for a box of shredded wheat puffs and repeated the
process. “What—what are you doing?”
As he grabbed a third box of cereal, he said, “My dad, he hides them
everywhere. These stacks. I found one inside the living room couch the other
day. He hides cash like alcoholics hide vodka bottles.” Davis brushed some
cereal dust off the hundred-dollar bills, stacked them next to the sink, and then
grabbed them. The entire stack fit in one hand. “A hundred thousand dollars,” he
said, and offered it to me.
“No way, Davis. I can’t—”
“Aza, the cops found, like, two million dollars executing their warrant, but I
bet they didn’t even get half of it. Everywhere I look, I find these stacks, okay?
Not to sound out of touch, but for my dad, this is a goddamned rounding error.
It’s a reward for not sharing the picture. I’ll have our lawyer call you. Simon
Morris. He’s nice, just a little lawyery.”
“I’m not trying—”
“But I can’t know that,” he said. “Please, just—if you still call or text or
whatever, I’ll know it’s not about the reward. And you will, too. That would be a
nice thing to know—even if you don’t call.” He walked over to a closet, opened
it, stuffed the money into a blue tote bag, and offered it to me.
He looked like a kid now—his watery brown eyes, the fear and fatigue in his
face, like a kid waking up from a nightmare or something. I took the bag.
“I’ll call you,” I said.
“We’ll see.”
—
I left the cabin calmly, then sprinted through the golf course, skirting the pool
complex, and ran up to the mansion. I ran upstairs and walked along a hallway
until I could hear Daisy talking behind a closed door. I opened it. Daisy and
Mychal were kissing in a large four-poster bed.
“Um,” I said.
“A bit of privacy, please?” Daisy asked.
I closed the door, muttering, “Well, but it isn’t your house.”
I didn’t know where to go then. I walked back downstairs. Noah was on the
couch watching TV. As I walked over to him, I noticed he was wearing actual
pajamas—Captain America ones—even though he was thirteen. On his lap, there
was a bowl of what appeared to be dry Lucky Charms. He took a handful and
shoved them into his mouth. “’Sup,” he said while chewing. His hair was greasy
and matted to his forehead, and up close he looked pale, almost translucent.
“You doing okay, Noah?”
“Kickin’ ass and takin’ names,” he said. He swallowed, and then said, “So,
did you find anything yet?”
“Huh?”
“About Dad,” he said. “Davis said you were after the reward. Did you find
anything?”
“Not really.”
“Can I send you something? I took all the notes off Dad’s phone from
iCloud. They might help you. Might be a clue or something. The last note, the
one he wrote that night, was ‘the jogger’s mouth.’ That mean anything to you?”
“I don’t think so.” I gave him my number so he could text me the notes and
told him I’d look into it.
“Thanks,” he said. His voice had gotten small. “Davis thinks we’re better off
with him on the run. Says it’d be worse if he was in jail.”
“What do you think?”
He stared up at me for a moment, then said, “I want him to come home.”
I sat down on the couch next to him. “I’m sure he’ll show up.”
I felt him leaning over until his shoulder was against mine. I wasn’t wild
about touching strangers, especially given that he didn’t seem to have showered
in some time, but I said, “It’s all right to be scared, Noah.” And then he turned
his face away from me and started sobbing. “You’re okay,” I told him, lying.
“You’re okay. He’ll come home.”
“I can’t think straight,” he said, his little voice half strangled by the crying.
“Ever since he left, I can’t think straight.” I knew how that felt—all my life, I’d
been unable to think straight, unable to even finish having a thought because my
thoughts came not in lines but in knotted loops curling in upon themselves, in
sinking quicksand, in light-swallowing wormholes. “You’re okay,” I lied to him
again. “You probably just need some rest.” I didn’t know what else to say. He
was so small, and so alone.
“Will you let me know? If you find anything out about Dad, I mean.”
“Yeah, of course.”
After a while, he straightened up and wiped his face against his sleeve. I told
him he should get some sleep. It was nearly midnight.
He put the bowl of Lucky Charms on the coffee table, stood up, and walked
upstairs without saying good-bye.
I didn’t know where to go, and having the bag of money in my hand was
freaking me out a little, so in the end I just left the house. I looked up at the sky
as I ambled toward Harold, and thought about the stars in Cassiopeia, centuries
of light-time from me and from one another.
I swung the bag in my hand as I walked. It weighed almost nothing.
TEN
I TEXTED DAISY the next morning while I was still in bed.
Big news call when you can.
She called immediately.
“Hey,” I said.
“I know he is a gigantic baby,” she responded, “but I actually think upon
close examination he is hot. And in general, quite charming, and very sexually
open and comfortable, although we didn’t do it or anything.”
“I’m thrilled for you, so last night—”
“And he really seemed to like me? Usually I feel like boys are a bit afraid of
me, but he wasn’t. He holds you and you feel held, you know what I’m saying?
Also he’s already called me this morning, which I found cute instead of
worrisomely overeager. But please do not think I am becoming the best friend
who falls in love and ditches her bitches. Wait, oh God, I just said I’m in love.
We’ve been hooking up for under twenty-four hours and I’m dropping L-bombs.
What is happening to me? Why is this boy I’ve known since eighth grade
suddenly so amazing?”
“Because you read too much romantic fan fiction?”
“There is literally no such thing,” she answered. “How’s Davis?”
“That’s what I want to talk about. Can we meet somewhere? It’s better if I
can show you.” I wanted to see her face when she saw the money.
“I already have a breakfast date, unfortunately.”
“I thought you weren’t ditching your bitches,” I said.
“And I’m not. My breakfast date is with Mr. Charles Cheese. Alas. Can it
wait till Monday?”
“Not really,” I said.
“Okay, I get off work at six. Applebee’s. Might have to multitask, though,
because I’m trying to finish a story—don’t take it personally okay he’s calling I
have to go thanks love you bye.”
As I put down my phone, I noticed Mom standing in my doorway.
“Everything okay?” she asked.
“Holy Helicopter Parenting, Mom.”
“How was your date with that boy?”
“Which boy? There are so many. I have a spreadsheet just to keep track of
them.”
—
To kill time that morning, I went through Noah’s file of entries from his dad’s
notes app. It was a long, seemingly random list—everything from book titles to
quotes.
Over time, markets will always seek to become more free.
Experiential value.
Floor five Stairway one
Disgrace—Coetzee
It went on like that for pages, just little memos to himself that were
inscrutable to anyone else. But the last four notes in the documents interested
me:
Maldives Kosovo Cambodia
Never Tell Our Business to Strangers
Unless you leave a leg behind
The jogger’s mouth
It was impossible to know when those notes had been written, and whether
they’d all been written at once, but they certainly seemed connected: A quick
search told me that Kosovo, Cambodia, and the Maldives were all nations that
had no extradition treaty with the United States, meaning that Pickett might be
allowed to stay in them without having to face criminal charges at home. Never
Tell Our Business to Strangers was a memoir by a woman whose father lived on
the run from the law. The top search result for “Unless you leave a leg behind”
was a news article called “How White-Collar Fugitives Survive on the Lam;” the
quote in question referred to how difficult it is to fake your own death.
“The jogger’s mouth” made no sense to me, and searching turned up nothing
except for a bunch of people jogging with their mouths open. But of course we
all put ridiculous things in our notes apps that only make sense to us. That’s what
notes are for. Maybe he’d just seen a jogger with an interesting mouth. I felt bad
for Noah, but eventually I set the list aside.
—
Harold and I made it to Applebee’s half an hour early that afternoon. For some
reason, I was scared to actually get out of the car, but if you pulled down the
center segment of Harold’s backseat, you could reach directly into the trunk. So I
wiggled my way back there and fumbled around until I’d found the tote bag with
the money, my dad’s phone, and its car charger.
I stuffed the bag under the passenger seat, plugged in my dad’s phone, and
waited for it to charge enough to turn on.
Years ago, Mom had backed up all Dad’s pictures and emails onto a
computer and multiple hard drives, but I liked swiping through them on his
phone—partly because that’s how I’d always looked at them, but mostly because
there was something magical about it being his phone, which still worked eight
years after his body stopped working.
The screen lit up and then loaded the home screen, a picture of my mom and
me at Juan Solomon Park, seven-year-old me on a playground swing, leaning so
far back that my upside-down face was turned to the camera. Mom always said I
remembered the pictures, not what was actually happening when they were
taken, but still, I felt like I could remember—him pushing me on the swing, his
hand as big as my back, the certainty that swinging away from him also meant
swinging back to him.
I tapped over to his photos. He’d taken most of the pictures himself, so you
rarely see him—instead, you see what he saw, what looked interesting to him,
which was mostly me, Mom, and the sky broken up by tree branches.
I swiped right, watching us all get younger. Mom riding a tiny tricycle with
tiny me on her shoulders, me eating breakfast with cinnamon sugar plastered all
over my face. The only pictures he appeared in were selfies, but phones back
then didn’t have front-facing cameras, so he had to guess at the framing. The
pictures were inevitably crooked, part of us out of the frame, but you could
always see me at least, curling into Mom—I was a mama’s girl.
She looked so young in those pictures—her skin taut, her face thin. He’d
often take five or six pictures at once in the hopes of getting one right, and if you
swiped through them like a flipbook, Mom’s smile got bigger and smaller, my
squirming six-year-old self moved this way or that, but Dad’s face never
changed.
When he fell, his headphones were still playing music. I do remember that.
He was listening to some old soul song, and it was coming out of his earbuds
loud, his body on its side. He was just lying there, the lawn mower stopped, not
far from the one tree in our front yard. Mom told me to call 911, and I did. I told
the operator my dad had fallen. She asked if he was breathing, and I asked Mom,
and she said no, and the whole time this totally incongruous soul song was
crooning tinnily through his earbuds.
Mom kept doing CPR on him until the ambulance came. He was dead the
whole time, but we didn’t know. We didn’t know for sure until a doctor opened
the door to the windowless hospital “family room” where we were waiting, and
said, “Did your husband have a heart condition?” Past tense.
My favorite pictures of my dad are the few where he’s out of focus—because
that’s how people are, really, and so I settled on one of those, a picture he’d
taken of himself with a friend at a Pacers game, the basketball court behind
them, their features blurred.
And then I told him. I told him that I lucked into some money and that I’d try
to do right by it and that I missed him.
—
I’d put the phone and charger away by the time Daisy showed up. She was
walking toward Applebee’s when I called to her through Harold’s open window.
She came over and got into the passenger seat.
“Can you give me a ride home after this? My dad is taking Elena to some
math thing.”
“Yeah, of course. Listen, there’s a bag under your seat,” I said. “Don’t freak
out.”
She reached down, pulled out the bag, and opened it. “Oh, fuck,” she
whispered. “Oh my God, Holmesy, what is this? Is this real?” Tears sprouted
from her eyes. I’d never seen Daisy cry.
“Davis said it was worth it to him, that he’d rather give us the reward than
have us snooping around.”
“It’s real?”
“Seems to be. I guess his lawyer is going to call me tomorrow.”
“Holmesy, this is, this is—is this one hundred thousand dollars?”
“Yeah, fifty each. Do you think we can keep it?”
“Hell yes, we can keep it.”
I told her about Davis calling it a rounding error, but I still worried that it
might be dirty money or that I might be exploiting Davis or . . . but she shushed
me. “Holmesy. I’m so fucking done with the idea that there’s nobility in turning
down money.”
“But it’s—like, we only got this money because we know someone.”
“Yeah, and Davis Pickett only got his money because he knew someone,
specifically his father. This is not illegal or unethical. It’s awesome.”
She was staring out the windshield. It had started to drizzle a little—one of
those cloudy days in Indiana when the sky feels very close to the ground.
Out on Ditch Road, a stoplight turned yellow, then red. “I’m gonna go to
college,” she said. “And not at night.”
“I mean, it’s not enough to pay for all of college.”
She smiled. “Yeah, I know it’s not enough to pay for all of college, Professor
Buzzkill. But it is fifty thousand dollars, which will make college a hell of a lot
easier.” She turned to me and grabbed me by the shoulders and shook me.
“HOLMESY. BE HAPPY. WE ARE RICH.” She pulled a single hundred-dollar
bill from one of the stacks and pocketed it. “Let’s have the finest meal
Applebee’s has to offer.”
—
At our usual table, Daisy and I shocked Holly by ordering two sodas. When she
returned with our drinks, she asked Daisy, “You want the Blazin’ Texan burger?”
“Holly, what is your best steak?”
Holly, unamused as usual, answered, “None of them are that good.”
“Well, then I’ll have my usual Blazin’ Texan burger, but I’d like to upgrade
my side to onion rings. And yes, I know it’s extra.”
Holly nodded, then turned her eyes to me. “Veggie burger,” I said. “No
cheese or mayonnaise or—”
“I know your order,” Holly said. “Coupon?”
“Not today, Holly,” Daisy answered. “Not today.”
—
We spent most of dinner imagining how, precisely, Daisy would retire from
Chuck E. Cheese’s. “I want to go in tomorrow, totally normal day, and when I
draw the short straw and have to get in the Chuckie costume, I just walk off with
it. Walk right through the doors, into my brand-new car, take Chuckie home, get
him taxidermied, and mount him on the wall like a hunting trophy.”
“It’s so weird, putting the heads of stuff you’ve killed on the wall,” I said.
“Davis’s guesthouse was full of that stuff.”
“Tell me about it,” Daisy said. “Mychal and I were hooking up in the actual
shadow of a stuffed moose head. BTW, thanks for walking in on us last night,
perv.”
“Sorry, I wanted to tell you that you’re rich.” She laughed and shook her
head again in disbelief. “I ran into Noah, by the way, the little brother? He asked
if I knew anything about his dad and showed me this list of his notes. Here,” I
said, and showed her the list on my phone. “His last note was ‘the jogger’s
mouth.’ That mean anything to you?” Daisy shook her head slowly. “I just feel
bad for him,” I said. “He was crying and everything.”
“That kid is not your problem,” Daisy said. “We’re not in the helpingbillionaire-
orphans business; we’re in the getting-rich business, and business is
booming.”
“Well, fifty thousand dollars isn’t rich,” I said. “I mean, it’s less than half of
what IU would cost,” which was the state school a couple hours south of us in
Bloomington.
Daisy went quiet for a long time, her eyes blanked by concentration.
“All right,” she said at last. “Just did some mental math. Fifty thousand
dollars is, like, five thousand nine hundred hours at my job. Which is, like, seven
hundred eight-hour shifts, if you can even get a full shift, which usually you
can’t, so that’s two years of working seven days a week, eight hours a day.
Maybe that’s not rich to you, Holmesy, but that’s rich to me.”
“Fair enough,” I said.
“And it was all sitting in a box of Cheerios.”
“Well, like half of it was in a box of shredded wheat.”
“You know what makes you a solid BFF, Holmesy? That you even told me
about the money. Like, I hope I am the sort of person who would go halvsies
with you on a six-figure-lottery situation, but to be perfectly honest, I don’t trust
myself.” She took a bite of her burger and mostly swallowed before saying,
“This lawyer guy isn’t going to try to take back the money, is he?”
“I don’t think so,” I said.
“We should go to a bank,” she said. “Get it deposited now.”
“Davis said we should wait to talk to the lawyer.”
“You trust him?”
“Yeah. I really do.”
“Aww, Holmesy, we’ve both fallen in love. Me with an artist, you with a
billionaire. We’re finally leading the debutante lives we’ve always deserved.”
In the end, our meal cost less than thirty dollars, but we left Holly a twentydollar
tip for putting up with us.
ELEVEN
I WAS WATCHING VIDEOS ON MY PHONE the next morning when the call came in.
“Hello?” I said.
“Aza Holmes?”
“This is she.”
“This is Simon Morris. I believe you’re acquainted with Davis Pickett.”
“Hold on.” I slipped on some shoes, snuck past Mom, who was watching TV
in the living room while grading tests, and went outside. I walked down to the
edge of our yard and sat down facing the house.
“Okay, hi,” I said.
“I understand that you’ve received a gift from Davis.”
“Yeah,” I said. “I split it with my friend; is that okay?”
“How you handle your financial affairs is unimportant to me. Ms. Holmes,
you may find that if a teenager walks into a bank with a vast array of hundreddollar
bills, the bank will generally be suspicious, so I’ve spoken to one of our
bankers at Second Indianapolis, and they’ll accept your deposit. I’ve set an
appointment for you at three fifteen P.M. on Monday at the branch at Eighty-Sixth
Street and College Avenue. I believe your school day ends at two fifty-five, so
you should have adequate time to get there.”
“How do you know—”
“I’m thorough.”
“Can I ask you a question?”
“You just have,” he noted dryly.
“So you’re taking care of Pickett’s affairs while he is gone?”
“That’s correct.”
“And if Pickett shows up somewhere . . .”
“Then the pleasures and sorrows of his life will belong to him again. Until
then, some of them fall to me. May I request that you come to your point?”
“I’m sorta worried about Noah.”
“Worried?”
“He just seems really sad, and there’s kind of no one there to look after him.
I mean, isn’t there any other family?”
“None with whom the Picketts have a good relationship. Davis has been
declared an emancipated minor by the state and is his brother’s legal guardian.”
“I don’t mean a legal guardian. I mean someone who actually, you know,
looks after him. Like, Davis isn’t a parent. I mean, they’re not just gonna be
alone forever, are they? What if their dad is dead or something?”
“Ms. Holmes, legal death is different from biological death. I trust that
Russell is both legally and biologically living, but I know he is legally alive
because Indiana law considers an individual alive until either biological evidence
of their death emerges or seven years pass from the last evidence of life. So, the
legal question—”
“I don’t mean legally,” I said. “I just mean, who’s going to take care of
him?”
“But I can only answer that question legally. And the legal answer is that I
administer the financial affairs, the house manager administers the home affairs,
and Davis is the guardian. Your concern is admirable, Ms. Holmes, but I assure
you that everything is cared for, legally. Three fifteen tomorrow. Your banker’s
name is Josephine Jackson. Do you have any other questions of pertinence to
your situation?”
“I don’t think so.”
“Well, you have my number. Be well, Ms. Holmes.”
—
I felt fine the next day at school, until Daisy and I were on our way to the bank. I
was driving, and Daisy was talking about how her most recent fic had sort of
gone viral in the Star Wars fan-fiction world and how she had tons of kudos on it
and how she’d had to stay up all night to finish this paper on The Scarlet Letter
and how she could maybe finally get some sleep now that she was “retiring”
from Chuck E. Cheese’s, and I felt fine. I felt like a perfectly normal person,
who was not cohabitating with a demon that forced me to think thoughts I hated
thinking, and I was just feeling, like, I’ve been better this week. Maybe the
medicine is working, when from nowhere the thought appeared: The medicine
has made you complacent, and you forgot to change the Band-Aid this morning.
I was pretty sure I had actually changed the Band-Aid right after waking up,
just before I brushed my teeth, but the thought was insistent. I don’t think you
changed it. I think this is last night’s Band-Aid. Well, it’s not last night’s BandAid
because I definitely changed it at lunch. Did you, though? I think so. You
THINK so? I’m pretty sure. And the wound is open. Which was true. It hadn’t
yet scabbed over. And you left the same Band-Aid on for—God—probably thirtyseven
hours by now, just letting it fester inside that warm, moist old Band-Aid. I
glanced down at the Band-Aid. It looked new. You didn’t. I think I did. Are you
sure? No, but that’s actually progress if I’m not checking it every five minutes.
Yeah, progress toward an infection. I’ll do it at the bank. It’s probably already
too late. That’s ridiculous. Once the infection is in your bloodstream—Stop that
makes no sense it’s not even red or swollen. You know it doesn’t have to be—
Please just stop I will change it at the bank—YOU KNOW I’M RIGHT.
“Did I go to the bathroom before lunch?” I asked Daisy quietly.
“Dunno,” she said. “Um, you sat down after us, so I guess?”
“But I didn’t say anything about it?”
“No, you didn’t say, ‘Greetings, lunch tablemates. I have just returned from
the bathroom.’”
Felt the tension between the urge to pull over and change the Band-Aid and
the certainty of Daisy thinking me crazy. Told myself I was fine, this was a
malfunction in my brain, that thoughts were just thoughts, but when I glanced at
the Band-Aid again I saw the pad was stained. I could see the stain. Blood. Or
pus. Something.
I pulled into an optometrist’s parking lot, took off the Band-Aid, and looked
at the wound. It was red at the edges. The Band-Aid had dried blood on it. Like
it hadn’t been changed in some time.
“Holmesy, I’m sure you went to the bathroom. You always go to the
bathroom.”
“Doesn’t matter now; it’s infected,” I said.
“No, it’s not.”
“You see this red?” I pointed at the inflamed skin on either side of the
wound. “That’s infection. That’s a big problem.” I rarely let anyone see my
finger without the Band-Aid, but I wanted Daisy to understand. This was not like
the other times. This was not irrational worry, because dried blood was unusual,
even for when the callus was cracked open. It meant the Band-Aid had been on
for way too long. This was not normal. Then again, didn’t it always feel
different? No, this felt different from the other differents. There was visible
evidence of infection.
“It looks like your finger has looked every single time you’ve ever worried
about it.”
I squeezed some hand sanitizer onto the cut, felt a deep, stinging burn,
unwrapped a new Band-Aid, and wrapped it around my finger. I sat there for a
while, embarrassed, wishing I were alone, but also terrified. Couldn’t get the
redness and the swelling out of my mind, my skin responding to the invasion of
parasitic bacteria. Hated myself. Hated this.
“Hey,” Daisy said. She put a hand on my knee. “Don’t let Aza be cruel to
Holmesy, okay?”
This was different. The sting of the hand sanitizer was gone now, which
meant the bacteria were back to breeding, spreading through my finger into the
bloodstream. Why did I ever crack open the callus anyway? Why couldn’t I just
leave it alone? Why did I have to give myself a constant, gaping open wound on,
of all places, my finger? The hands are the dirtiest parts of the body. Why
couldn’t I pinch my earlobe or my belly or my ankle? I’d probably killed myself
with sepsis because of some stupid childhood ritual that didn’t even prove what I
wanted it to prove, because what I wanted to know was unknowable, because
there was no way to be sure about anything.
It’ll feel better if you reapply the hand sanitizer. Just a couple more times. It
was 3:12. We had to get to the bank. I took off the Band-Aid, applied hand
sanitizer, reapplied a Band-Aid. It was 3:13. Daisy said, “Do you want me to
drive?” I shook my head. Started Harold up. Put him in reverse. Then back in
park. Took off the Band-Aid, applied more hand sanitizer. It stung less this time.
Maybe that means they’re mostly dead. Or maybe it means they’re in too deep
already, that they’ve gotten through the skin into the blood. Just look at it one
more time. Does it look like the swelling is getting better? It’s only been eight
minutes too soon to tell. Stop. It was 3:15. “Holmesy,” she said. “We need to go.
I can drive.”
I shook my head again, put the car into reverse, and this time succeeded in
getting moving. “I wish I understood it,” she told me as I drove. “Like, does it
help to be reassuring or is it better to worry with you? Is there anything that
makes it better?”
“It’s infected,” I whispered. “And I did it to myself. Like I always do.
Opened the callus up and now it’s infected.” I was that fish, infected with a
parasite, swimming close to the surface, trying to get myself eaten.
—
When we finally got to the bank, I stood in the back while Daisy introduced
herself to a teller, and then we were escorted to a glassed-off private office in the
back, where a thin woman in a black suit placed our cash into a machine that
shuffled through the bills, counting them. We filled out a bunch of forms and
then had brand-new bank accounts, complete with debit cards that would arrive
in seven to ten days. The woman gave us five temporary checks to use until our
real ones arrived, encouraged us not to make any major purchases for at least six
months “while you learn to live with this windfall,” and then started talking
about the places we could put the money—college savings accounts or mutual
funds or bonds or stocks—and I was trying to pay attention to her, but the
problem was I wasn’t really in the bank. I was inside my head, the torrent of
thoughts screaming that I had sealed my fate by not changing the Band-Aid for
over a day, that it was too late, and now I could feel the heat and soreness in my
fingertip, and you know it’s real once you can physically feel it, because the
senses can’t lie. Or can they? I thought, It’s happening, the it too terrifying and
vast to name with anything but a pronoun.
—
Driving to Daisy’s apartment complex, I kept forgetting why I was stopped at a
stoplight, and then I’d let off Harold’s brake only to look up and notice, oh, right.
The light is red.
You hear a lot about the benefits of insanity or whatever—like, Dr. Karen
Singh had once told me this Edgar Allan Poe quote: “The question is not yet
settled, whether madness is or is not the loftiest intelligence.” I guess she was
trying to make me feel better, but I find mental disorders to be vastly overrated.
Madness, in my admittedly limited experience, is accompanied by no
superpowers; being mentally unwell doesn’t make you loftily intelligent any
more than having the flu does. So I know I should’ve been a brilliant detective or
whatever, but in actuality I was one of the least observant people I’d ever met. I
was aware of absolutely nothing outside myself on the drive to Daisy’s
apartment building and then to my house.
I went to the bathroom when I got home and examined the cut. The swelling
seemed down. Maybe. Maybe the light in the bathroom just wasn’t strong
enough for me to see clearly. I cleaned it with soap and water, patted it dry,
applied hand sanitizer, and then rebandaged my finger. I also took my regular
medication, and then a few minutes later an oblong white pill I’d been told to use
when panicky.
I let the pill melt on my tongue into a vague sweetness and waited for it to
kick in. I felt certain something was going to kill me, and of course I was right:
Something is going to kill you, someday, and you can’t know if this is the day.
After a while, my head got heavy, and I sat down on the couch in front of the
TV. I didn’t really have the energy to turn it on, so I just stared at the blank
screen.
The oblong pill made me feel exceptionally groggy, but only from the bridge
of my nose up. My body felt like its standard self, broken and insufficient in the
usual ways, but my brain felt sloppy and exhausted, like the noodle legs of a
runner post-marathon. Mom came home and plopped down next to me. “Long
day,” she said. “I don’t mind students, Aza. It’s the parents that make my job
hard.”
“Sorry,” I said.
“How was your day?”
“Okay,” I said. “I don’t have a fever, do I?”
She pressed the back of her hand to my forehead. “I don’t think so. Do you
feel sick?”
“Just tired, I think.” Mom turned on the TV, and I told her I was going to lie
down and do some homework.
—
I read my history textbook for a while, but my consciousness felt like a camera
with a dirty lens, so I decided to text Davis.
Me: Hi.
Him: Hi.
Me: How are you?
Him: Pretty good, you?
Me: Pretty good.
Him: Let’s continue this awkward silence in person.
Me: When?
Him: There is a meteor shower Thursday night. Should be a good one if
it’s not cloudy.
Me: Sounds great. See you then. I have to go my mom is here.
She had, in fact, peeked her head in through the door. “What’s up?” I asked.
“Want to make dinner together?”
“I need to read.”
She came in, sat down on the edge of my bed, and said, “You feeling
scared?”
“Kinda.”
“Of what?”
“It’s not like that. The sentence doesn’t have, like, an object. I’m just
scared.”
“I don’t know what to say, Aza. I see the pain on your face and I want to take
it from you.”
I hated hurting her. I hated making her feel helpless. I hated it. She was
running her fingers through my hair. “You’re all right,” she said. “You’re all
right. I’m here. I’m not going anywhere.” I felt myself stiffen a little as she kept
playing with my hair. “Maybe you just need a good night’s sleep,” she said at
last—the same lie I’d fed to Noah.
TWELVE
THE MORNING OF THE METEOR SHOWER, I arrived at school with Harold and
discovered a bright orange Volkswagen Beetle parked in my usual spot. As I
pulled in next to the car, I saw that Daisy was in the driver’s seat. I rolled down
my window and said, “Didn’t Josephine the banker tell us not to make any
purchases for six months?”
“I know, I know,” she said. “But I talked the car sales dude down to eightyfour
hundred dollars from ten thousand, so in a way I actually saved money. You
know what the color’s called?” She snapped. “Snap orange! Because it’s
snappy.”
“Don’t waste the money, okay?”
“Don’t worry, Holmesy. This car is only going to appreciate in value. Liam
is a future collector’s item. I’ve named him Liam, by the way.” I smiled—it was
an inside joke that literally no one else would get.
As we walked across the parking lot, Daisy handed me a thick book, Fiske
Guide to Colleges. “I also picked this up, but it turns out I don’t need it because
I’m definitely going to IU. I always knew that college was expensive, but some
of these places cost almost a hundred grand per year. What do they do there?
Are the classes on yachts? Do you get to live in a castle and get served by houseelves?
Even Rich Me can’t afford fancy college.”
Certainly not if you’re buying cars, I wanted to say, but instead I asked her
about the Pickett disappearance. “You ever figure out what ‘the jogger’s mouth’
was?”
“Holmesy,” she said. “We got the reward. It’s over.”
“Right, I know,” I said, and before I could say anything else, she spotted
Mychal across the parking lot and ran off to hug him.
—
All morning, I lost myself in Daisy’s college book. Every now and again, a bell
would sound, and I’d move to a different room, sitting at a different desk, and
then I’d go back to reading the college guide, holding it on my lap under the
desk. I’d never really thought about going to college anywhere but Indiana
University or Purdue—my mom had gone to Indiana and my dad to Purdue—
and they were both cheap compared with going to school out of state.
But reading through the hundreds of colleges in this book, which were rated
on everything from academics to cafeteria quality, I couldn’t help but imagine
myself at some small college somewhere on a hilltop in the middle of nowhere
with two-hundred-year-old buildings. I read about one school where you could
use the same library study carrel that Alice Walker had. Admittedly, fifty
thousand would hardly make a dent in the tuition, but maybe I could get a
scholarship. My grades were good, and I was a competent standardized test
taker.
I let myself imagine it—taking classes like Politicized Geography and
Nineteenth-Century British Women in Literature in small classrooms, everyone
seated in a circle. I imagined the crunch of gravel paths under my feet as I
walked from class to the library, where I’d study with friends, and then before
dinner at a cafeteria that served everything from cereal to sushi, we’d stop at the
college coffee shop and talk about philosophy or power systems or whatever you
talk about in college.
It was so fun to imagine the possibilities—West Coast or East Coast? City or
country? I felt like I might end up anywhere, and imagining all the futures I
might have, all the Azas I might become, was a glorious and welcome vacation
from living with the me I currently was.
I broke away from the college guide only for lunch. Across the table from
me, Mychal was working on a new art project—meticulously tracing the
waveforms of some song onto a sheet of thin, translucent paper—while Daisy
regaled our lunch table with the story of her car purchase, without ever quite
revealing how she came across the necessary funds. After I’d eaten a few bites
of my sandwich, I took out my phone and texted Davis. What time tonight?
Him: Looks like it’s going to be overcast tonight so no meteor shower.
Me: My primary interest is not the meteor shower.
Him: Oh. Then after school?
Me: I’ve got a homework date with Daisy. Seven?
Him: Seven works.
—
After school, Daisy and I locked ourselves in my room to study for a couple
hours. “It’s only been three days since I retired from Chuck E. Cheese, but it’s
already shocking how much easier school is,” she said as she unzipped her
backpack. She pulled out a brand-new laptop and set it up on my desk.
“Jesus, Daisy, don’t spend it all at once,” I said quietly, so Mom wouldn’t
hear. Daisy shot me a look. “What?”
“You already had a car and a computer,” she said.
“I’m just saying you don’t want to spend all of it.”
She rolled her eyes a little, and I said what again, but she disappeared into
her online world. I could see her screen from the bed—she was scrolling through
comments on her stories as I read one of Alexander Hamilton’s Federalist essays
for history. I kept reading the words but not understanding them, then circling
back, reading the same paragraph over and over again.
Daisy was quiet for a few minutes, but at last said, “I try really hard not to
judge you, Holmesy, and it’s slightly infuriating when you judge me.”
“I’m not judging—”
“I know you think you’re poor or whatever, but you know nothing about
being actually poor.”
“Okay, I’ll shut up about it,” I said.
“You’re so stuck in your head,” she continued. “It’s like you genuinely can’t
think about anyone else.” I felt like I was getting smaller. “I’m sorry, Holmesy, I
shouldn’t say that. It’s just frustrating sometimes.” When I didn’t respond, she
kept talking. “I don’t mean that you’re a bad friend or anything. But you’re
slightly tortured, and the way you’re tortured is sometimes also painful for, like,
everyone around you.”
“Message received,” I said.
“I don’t mean to sound like a bitch.”
“You don’t,” I said.
“Do you know what I mean, though?” she asked.
“Yeah,” I said.
We studied together quietly for another hour before she said she needed to
leave for dinner with her parents. When she got up to leave, we both said, “I’m
sorry,” at the same time, then laughed. By the time Davis texted me at 6:52, I
had mostly forgotten about it.
Him: I’m in your driveway should I come in?
Me: No no no no nope no I will be out shortly.
Mom was emptying the dishwasher. “Headed out to dinner,” I told her, and
then grabbed my coat and got out the door before she could inquire further.
“Hi,” he said as I climbed into his car.
“Hi back,” I said.
“Have you eaten?” he asked.
“I’m not really hungry, but we can get food somewhere if you are,” I said.
“I’m good,” he said, backing up. “I actually kind of hate eating. I’ve always
had a nervous stomach.”
“Me too,” I said, and then my phone started ringing. “It’s my mom. Don’t
say anything.” I tapped to answer. “Hey.”
“Tell the driver of that black SUV to turn around this instant and come back
to our house.”
“Mom.”
“This isn’t going further without me meeting him.”
“You have met him. When we were eleven.”
“I am your mother, and he is your—whatever he is—and I want to talk to
him.”
“Fine,” I said, and hung up. “We, uh, need to go into the house if that’s okay,
and meet my mom.”
“Cool.”
Something in his voice reminded me that his mom was dead, and I thought
about how everyone always seemed slightly uncomfortable when discussing
their fathers in front of me. They always seemed worried I’d be reminded of my
fatherlessness, as if I could somehow forget.
—
I never realized how small my house was until I saw Davis seeing it—the
linoleum in the kitchen rolling up in the corners, the little settling cracks in the
walls, all our furniture older than I was, the mismatched bookshelves.
Davis looked huge and misplaced in our house. I couldn’t remember the last
time I’d seen a guy inside this room. He wasn’t quite six feet tall, but somehow
his presence made the ceilings seem low. I felt embarrassed of our dusty old
books and the walls decorated with family photos instead of art. I knew I
shouldn’t be ashamed—but I was anyway.
“It’s nice to see you, Ms. Holmes,” Davis said, offering a handshake. My
mom hugged him. We all sat down at our kitchen table, which almost never had
more than two people at it—Mom and me. It seemed overfull.
“How are you, Davis?” she asked.
“Things are good. As you may have heard, I am kind of an orphan, but I am
well. How are you?”
“Who looks after you these days?” she asked.
“Well, everybody and nobody, I guess,” he said. “I mean, we have a house
manager, and there’s a lawyer guy who does the money stuff.”
“You’re a junior at Aspen Hall, yes?” I closed my eyes and tried to
telepathically beg my mother not to attack him.
“Yes.”
“Aza is not some girl from the other side of the river.”
“Mom,” I said.
“And I know you can have anything the moment you want it, and that can
make a person think the world belongs to them, that people belong to them. But I
hope you understand you are not entitled to—”
“Mom,” I said again.
I shot Davis an apologetic look, but he didn’t see, because he was looking at
my mom. He started to say something, but then had to stop, because his eyes
were welling up with tears.
“Davis, are you all right?” my mom asked. He tried to speak again but it
devolved into a choked sob.
“Davis, I’m sorry, I didn’t realize . . .”
Blushing, he said, “I’m sorry.”
Mom started to reach a hand across the table, but then stopped herself. “I just
want you to be good to my daughter,” she said. “There’s only one of her.”
“We have to get going,” I announced.
Mom and Davis continued their staring contest, but Mom finally said, “Back
by eleven,” and I grabbed Davis by the forearm and pulled him out the front
door, shooting Mom a look as I went.
—
“Are you okay?” I asked as soon as we were safely inside his Escalade.
“Yeah,” he said quietly.
“She’s just really overprotective.”
“I get it,” he said.
“You don’t need to be embarrassed.”
“I’m not embarrassed.”
“Then what are you?”
“It’s complicated.”
“I’ve got time,” I told him.
“She’s wrong that I can have anything I want whenever I want it.”
“What do you want that you don’t have?” I asked.
“A mother, for starters.” He put the car into reverse and backed out of the
driveway.
I wasn’t sure what to say, so eventually I just said, “Sorry.”
“You know that part of Yeats’s ‘The Second Coming’ where it’s, like, ‘The
best lack all conviction, while the worst are full of passionate intensity’?”
“Yeah, we read it in AP.”
“I think it’s actually worse to lack all conviction. Because then you just go
along, you know? You’re just a bubble on the tide of empire.”
“That’s a good line.”
“Stole it from Robert Penn Warren,” he said. “My good lines are always
stolen. I lack all conviction.” We drove across the river. Looking down, I could
see Pirates Island.
“Your mom gives a shit, you know? Most adults are just hollowed out. You
watch them try to fill themselves up with booze or money or God or fame or
whatever they worship, and it all rots them from the inside until nothing is left
but the money or booze or God they thought would save them. That’s what my
dad is like—he really disappeared a long time ago, which is maybe why it didn’t
bother me much. I wish he were here, but I’ve wished that for a long time.
Adults think they’re wielding power, but really power is wielding them.”
“The parasite believes itself to be the host,” I said.
“Yeah,” he said. “Yeah.”
—
As we walked up to the Pickett house, I could see two place settings at one
corner of Davis’s huge dining room table. A candle flickered between the
settings, and the first floor of the house was lit a soft gold. My stomach was all
turned around, and I had no desire to eat, but I followed him in. “I guess Rosa
made us dinner,” he said to me. “So we should at least have a few bites to be
polite.”
“Hi, Rosa,” he said. “Thanks for staying late.”
She pulled him into a big bear hug. “I made spaghetti. Vegetarian.”
“You didn’t need to do this,” he said.
“My children are grown-ups, so you and Noah are the only little boys I have
left. And when you tell me you have a date with your new girlfriend—”
“Not girlfriend,” Davis said. “Old friend.”
“Old friends make the best girlfriends. You eat. I’ll see you tomorrow.” She
pulled him down into another hug and kissed him on the cheek. “Take something
up to Noah so he doesn’t starve,” Rosa added, “and do your dishes. It’s not too
hard to wipe dishes clean and put them in a dishwasher, Davis.”
“Got it,” he said.
“Your life is so weird,” I said as we sat down to eat at the table set for two,
with a Dr Pepper in front of my spot and a Mountain Dew in front of his.
“I guess,” he said. He raised his can of soda. “To weird,” he said.
“To weird.” We clinked cans and sipped.
“She acts like a parent,” I said.
“Yeah, well, she’s known me since I was a baby. And she cares about us. But
she also gets paid to care about us, you know? And if she didn’t . . . I mean,
she’d have to find a different job.”
“Yeah,” I said. It seemed to me that one of the defining features of parents is
that they don’t get paid to love you.
He asked me about my school day, and I told him I’d had a fight with Daisy.
I asked about his day at school, and he said, “It was okay. There’s this rumor at
school that I killed not only my dad, but also my mom . . . so. I don’t know. I
shouldn’t let it get to me.”
“That would get to anyone.”
“I can take it, but I worry about Noah.”
“How is Noah?”
“He climbed into bed with me last night and just cried. I felt so bad I loaned
him my Iron Man.”
“I’m sorry,” I said.
“He’s, just . . . I guess at some point, you realize that whoever takes care of
you is just a person, and that they have no superpowers and can’t actually protect
you from getting hurt. Which is one thing. But Noah is starting to understand
that maybe the person he thought was a superhero turns out sort of to be the
villain. And that really sucks. He keeps thinking Dad is going to come home and
prove his innocence, and I don’t know how to tell him that, you know, Dad isn’t
innocent.”
“Does the phrase ‘the jogger’s mouth’ mean anything to you?”
“No, but the cops asked me that, too. Said it was in Dad’s phone.”
“Yeah.”
“I mean, my father is many things—but a jogger is not one of them. He
thinks exercise is irrelevant, because Tua is going to unlock the key to eternal
life.”
“Seriously?”
“Yeah, he believes Malik is going to be able to identify some factor in
tuatara blood that makes them age slowly, and then he’s going to ‘cure death,’”
Davis said, using air quotes. “That’s why his will leaves everything to Tua—he
thinks he’s going to be remembered as the man who ended death.” I asked him if
Tua would really get all of his dad’s money, and he laughed a little and said,
“Everything. The business, the house, the property. I mean, Noah and I have
plenty of money for college and everything—but we’re not gonna be rich.”
“If you have plenty of money for college and everything, you’re rich.”
“True. And Dad doesn’t owe us anything. I just wish he’d, you know, do the
dad stuff. Take my brother to school in the morning, make sure he does his
homework, not disappear in the middle of the night to escape prosecution, et
cetera.”
“I’m sorry.”
“You say that a lot.”
“I feel it a lot.”
He looked up at me. “Have you ever been in love, Aza?”
“No. You?”
“No.” He glanced down at my plate, then said, “Okay, if neither of us is
going to eat, we should probably go outside. Maybe we’ll catch a break in the
clouds.”
—
We put our coats back on and walked outside. It was a windy night, and I tucked
my head into my chest as we walked, but when I glanced over at Davis, he was
looking up.
In the distance, I could see that two of the poolside recliners had been pulled
out onto the golf course, near one of the flags marking a hole. The flag was
whipping in the wind, and I could hear the white noise of traffic in the distance,
but it was otherwise quiet, the cicadas and crickets silenced by the cold. We lay
down on the loungers, next to each other but not touching, and looked up at the
sky for a while. “Well, this is disappointing,” he said.
“But it’s still happening, right? Like, there is still a meteor shower. We just
can’t see it.”
“Correct,” he said.
“So, what would it look like?” I asked.
“Huh?”
“If it weren’t cloudy, what would I be seeing?”
“Well.” He took his phone out and opened it up to some stargazing app. “So,
over here in the northern sky is the constellation Draco,” he said, “which to me
looks more like a kite than a dragon, but anyway, there would be meteors visible
around here. There’s not much moon tonight, so you could probably see five or
ten meteors an hour. Basically, we’re moving through dust left behind by this
comet called Giacobini-Zinner, and it would be super beautiful and romantic if
only we did not live in gloomy Indiana.”
“It is super beautiful and romantic,” I said. “We just can’t see it.”
I thought about him asking me if I’d ever been in love. It’s a weird phrase in
English, in love, like it’s a sea you drown in or a town you live in. You don’t get
to be in anything else—in friendship or in anger or in hope. All you can be in is
love. And I wanted to tell him that even though I’d never been in love, I knew
what it was like to be in a feeling, to be not just surrounded by it but also
permeated by it, the way my grandmother talked about God being everywhere.
When my thoughts spiraled, I was in the spiral, and of it. And I wanted to tell
him that the idea of being in a feeling gave language to something I couldn’t
describe before, created a form for it, but I couldn’t figure out how to say any of
that out loud.
“I can’t tell if this is a regular silence or an awkward silence,” Davis said.
“What gets me about that poem ‘The Second Coming’ . . . you know how it
talks about the widening spiral?”
“The widening gyre,” he corrected me. “‘Turning and turning in the
widening gyre.’”
“Right, whatever, the widening gyre. But the really scary thing is not turning
and turning in the widening gyre; it’s turning and turning in the tightening gyre.
It’s getting sucked into a whirlpool that shrinks and shrinks and shrinks your
world until you’re just spinning without moving, stuck inside a prison cell that is
exactly the size of you, until eventually you realize that you’re not actually in a
prison cell. You are the prison cell.”
“You should write a response,” he said. “To Yeats.”
“I’m not a poet,” I said.
“You talk like one,” he said. “Write down half the stuff you say and it would
be a better poem than I’ve ever written.”
“You write poetry?”
“Not really. Nothing good.”
“Like what?” I asked. It was so much easier to talk to him in the dark,
looking at the same sky instead of at each other. It felt like we didn’t have
bodies, like we were just voices talking.
“If I ever write something I’m proud of, I’ll let you read it.”
“I like bad poetry,” I said.
“Please don’t make me share my dumb poems with you. Reading someone’s
poetry is like seeing them naked.”
“So I’m basically saying I want to see you naked,” I said.
“They’re just stupid little things.”
“I want to hear one.”
“Okay, like, last year I wrote one called ‘Last Ducks of Autumn.’”
“And it goes . . .”
“The leaves are gone / you should be, too / I’d be gone if I were you / but
then again, here I am / walking alone / in the frigid dawn.”
“I quite like that,” I said.
“I like short poems with weird rhyme schemes, because that’s what life is
like.”
“That’s what life is like?” I was trying to get his meaning.
“Yeah. It rhymes, but not in the way you expect.”
I looked over at him. I suddenly wanted Davis badly enough that I no longer
cared why I wanted him, whether what wanted him was capitalized or lowercase.
I reached over, touched his cold cheek with my cold hand, and began to kiss him.
When we came up for air, I felt his hands on my waist, and he said, “I, uh,
wow.”
I smirked at him. I liked feeling his body against mine, one of his hands
tracing my spine. “Got any other poems?”
“I’ve been trying to write just couplets lately. Like, nature stuff. Like, ‘the
daffodil knows more of spring / than roses know of anything.’”
“Yup, that works, too,” I said, and kissed him again. I felt my chest tighten,
his cold lips and warm mouth, his hands pulling me closer to him through the
layers of our coats.
I liked making out with so many layers on. Our breathing steamed up his
glasses as we kissed, and he tried to take them off, but I pressed them up the
bridge of his nose, and we were laughing together, and then he started kissing
my neck, and a thought occurred to me: His tongue had been in my mouth.
I told myself to be in this moment, to let myself feel his warmth on my skin,
but now his tongue was on my neck, wet and alive and microbial, and his hand
was sneaking under my jacket, his cold fingers against my bare skin. It’s fine
you’re fine just kiss him you need to check something it’s fine just be fucking
normal check to see if his microbes stay in you billions of people kiss and don’t
die just make sure his microbes aren’t going to permanently colonize you come
on please stop this he could have campylobacter he could be a nonsymptomatic
E. coli carrier get that and you’ll need antibiotics and then you’ll get C. diff and
boom dead in four days please fucking stop just kiss him JUST CHECK TO
MAKE SURE.
I pulled away.
“You okay?” he asked.
I nodded. “I just, just need a little air.” I sat up, turned away from him, pulled
out my phone, and searched, “do bacteria of people you kiss stay inside your
body,” and quickly scrolled through a couple pseudoscience results before
getting to the one actual study done on the subject. Around eighty million
microbes are exchanged on average per kiss, and “after six-month follow-up,
human gut microbiomes appear to be modestly but consistently altered.”
His bacteria would be in me forever, eighty million of them, breeding and
growing and joining my bacteria and producing God knows what.
I felt his hand on my shoulder. I spun around and squirmed away from him.
My breath running away from me. Dots in my vision. You’re fine he’s not even
the first boy you’ve kissed eighty million organisms in me forever calm down
permanently altering the microbiome this is not rational you need to do
something please there is a fix here please get to a bathroom. “What’s wrong?”
“Uh, nothing,” I said. “I, um, just need to use the restroom.”
I pulled my phone back out to reread the study but resisted the urge, clicked
it shut and slid it back into my pocket. But no, I had to check to see if it had said
modestly altered or moderately altered. I pulled out my phone again, and brought
up the study. Modestly. Okay. Modestly is better than moderately. But
consistently. Shit.
I felt nauseated and disgusting, but also pathetic; I knew how I looked to
him. I knew that my crazy was no longer a quirk, a simple matter of a cracked
finger pad. Now, it was an irritation, like it was to Daisy, like it was to anyone
who got close to me.
I was cold, but started to sweat anyway. I zipped my jacket up to my chin as
I walked toward the house. I didn’t want to run, but every second counted.
Needed to get to a bathroom. Davis opened the back door for me and pointed me
down a hallway toward a guest bathroom. I closed the door and locked it,
shutting myself inside, and leaned against the countertop. I unzipped my jacket
and stared at myself in the mirror. I took off the Band-Aid, opened up the cut
with my thumbnail, then washed my hands and put on a new Band-Aid. I looked
in the drawers beneath the sink for some mouthwash, but they didn’t have any,
so in the end, I just swished cold water around in my mouth and spit it out.
There, are we good? I asked myself, and I responded, One more time to
make sure, and so I swished and gargled more water, spit it out. I patted my
sweaty face dry with some toilet paper and walked back into the golden light of
Davis’s mansion.
He motioned for me to sit down, and put his arm around me. I didn’t want
his microbiota near me, but I let him keep his arm there, because I didn’t want to
seem like a freak. “Are you okay?”
“Yeah. Just, like, a little panicky.”
“Was it something that I did? Should I do—”
“No, it’s not about you.”
“You can tell me.”
“It’s really not. I . . . just, kissing freaked me out a little, I guess.”
“Okay, so no kissing yet. That’s no problem.”
“It will be,” I said. “I have these . . . thought spirals, and I can’t get out of
them.”
“Turning and turning in the tightening gyre,” he said.
“I’m . . . this, like . . . this doesn’t get better. You should know that.”
“I’m not in a rush.”
I leaned forward, looking at the hardwood floor. “I’m not gonna un-have this
is what I mean. I’ve had it since I can remember and it’s not getting better and I
can’t have a normal life if I can’t kiss someone without freaking out.”
“It’s okay, Aza. Really.”
“You might think that now, but you won’t think that forever.”
“But it’s not forever,” he said. “It’s now. Can I get you anything? Glass of
water or something?”
“Can we . . . can we just watch a movie or something?”
“Yes,” he said. “Absolutely.” He offered me his hand, but I got up on my
own. As we walked toward the basement steps, Davis said, “Here at the Pickett
residence, we have both kinds of movies—Star Wars and Star Trek. What would
you prefer?”
“I’m not really a fan of space movies,” I said.
“Great, then we’ll watch Star Trek IV: The Voyage Home, forty percent of
which is set right here on earth.” I looked up at him and smiled, but I could not
cinch the lasso on my thoughts, which were galloping all around my brain.
—
We walked down to the basement, where I tapped the F. Scott Fitzgerald novel to
make the bookcase open. I sat down in one of the overstuffed leather recliners,
grateful for the armrests between the seats. Davis appeared after a while with a
Dr Pepper, placed it in the cup holder by my armrest, and sat down next to me.
“How do you manage to be best friends with Daisy without liking space
operas?”
“I’ll watch them with her; I just don’t love them,” I said. He’s trying to treat
you like you’re normal and you’re trying to respond like you’re normal but
everyone involved knows you are definitely not normal. Normal people can kiss
if they want to kiss. Normal people don’t sweat like you. Normal people choose
their thoughts like they choose what to watch on TV. Everyone in this
conversation knows you’re a freak.
“Have you read her fic?”
“I read a couple stories when she first started in middle school. They’re not
really my thing.” I could feel the sweat glands opening on my upper lip.
“She’s a pretty good writer. You should read them. You’re actually kind of in
some of them.”
“Yeah, okay,” I said quietly, and then at last he pulled out his phone and used
an app to start the movie. I pretended to watch while settling all the way into the
spiral. I kept thinking about that Pettibon painting, with its multicolored
whirlpool, pulling your eye into the center of it. I tried to breathe in the Dr.
Singh–sanctioned way without making it too obvious, but within a few minutes I
was sweating in earnest, and he definitely noticed, because he’d seen this movie
a hundred times, so really he was only watching it to watch me watch it, and I
could feel his glances over at me, and even though I had my jacket zipped, he
obviously had noticed the mad, wet mustache on my sopping upper lip.
I could feel the tension in the air, and I knew he was trying to figure out how
to make me happy again. His brain was spinning right alongside mine. I couldn’t
make myself happy, but I could make people around me miserable.
—
When the movie ended, I told him I was tired, because that seemed the adjective
most likely to get me where I needed to be—alone and in my bed. Davis drove
me home, walked me to the door, and kissed me chastely on my sweaty lips. As I
stood on my doormat, I waved at him. He backed out of the driveway, and then I
went into the garage, opened Harold’s trunk, and grabbed my dad’s phone,
because I felt like looking at his pictures.
I snuck past Mom, who was asleep on the couch in front of the TV. I found
an old wall charger in my desk, plugged in Dad’s phone, and sat there for a long
time swiping through his photos, scrolling through all the pictures of the sky
split open by tree branches.
“You know we’ve got those on the computer,” Mom said gently from behind
me. I hadn’t heard her get up.
“Yeah,” I said. I unplugged the phone and shut it off.
“Were you talking to him?”
“Kinda,” I said.
“What were you telling him?”
I smiled. “Secrets.”
“Ah, I tell him secrets, too. He’s good at keeping them.”
“The best,” I said.
“Aza, I’m very sorry if I hurt Davis’s feelings. And I’ve written him an
apology note as well. I took it too far. But I also need you to understand—” I
waved her away.
“It’s fine. Listen, I gotta change.” I grabbed clothes and then went to the
bathroom, where I undressed, toweled off the sweat, and then let my body cool
down in the air, my feet cold against the floor. I untied my hair, then stared at
myself in the mirror. I hated my body. It disgusted me—its hair, its pinpricks of
sweat, its scrawniness. Skin pulled over a skeleton, an animated corpse. I wanted
out—out of my body, out of my thoughts, out—but I was stuck inside of this
thing, just like all the bacteria colonizing me.
Knock on the door. “I’m changing,” I said. I removed the Band-Aid, checked
it for blood or pus, tossed it in the trash, and then applied hand sanitizer to my
finger, the burn of it seeping into the cut.
I pulled on sweatpants and an old T-shirt of my mom’s, and emerged from
the bathroom, where Mom was waiting for me.
“You feeling anxious?” she said askingly.
“I’m fine,” I answered, and turned toward my room.
I turned out the lights and got into bed. I wasn’t tired, exactly, but I wasn’t
feeling too keen on consciousness, either. When Mom came in, a few minutes
later, I pretended to be asleep so I wouldn’t have to talk to her. She stood above
me, singing this old song she’d sung whenever I couldn’t sleep, as far back as I
could remember.
It’s a song soldiers in England used to sing to the tune of the New Year’s
song, “Auld Lang Syne.” It goes, “We’re here because we’re here because we’re
here because we’re here.” Her pitch rose through the first half like a deep breath
in, and then she sang it back down. “We’re here because we’re here because
we’re here because we’re here.”
Even though I was supposed to be basically grown up and my mother
annoyed the hell out of me, I couldn’t stop thinking until her lullaby finally put
me to sleep.
THIRTEEN
DESPITE MY HAVING psychologically decompensated in his presence, Davis texted
me the next morning before I even got out of bed.
Him: Want to watch a movie tonight? Doesn’t even have to be set in
space.
Me: I can’t. Another time maybe. Sorry I freaked out and for the
sweating and everything.
Him: You don’t even sweat an un-normal amount.
Me: I definitely do but I don’t want to talk about it.
Him: You really don’t like your body.
Me: True.
Him: I like it. It’s a good body.
I enjoyed being with him more in this nonphysical space, but I also felt the
need to board up the windows of my self.
Me: I feel kinda precarious in general, and I can’t really date you. Or
date anyone. I’m sorry but I can’t. I like you, but I can’t date you.
Him: We agree on that. Too much work. All people in relationships ever
do is talk about their relationship status. It’s like a Ferris wheel.
Me: Huh?
Him: When you’re on a Ferris wheel all anyone ever talks about is being
on the Ferris wheel and the view from the Ferris wheel and whether the
Ferris wheel is scary and how many more times it will go around. Dating
is like that. Nobody who’s doing it ever talks about anything else. I have
no interest in dating.
Me: Well, what do you have an interest in?
Him: You.
Me: I don’t know how to respond to that.
Him: You don’t need to. Have a good day, Aza.
Me: You too, Davis.
—
I had an appointment with Dr. Karen Singh the next day after school. I sat on the
love seat across from her and looked up at that picture of a man holding a net. I
stared at the picture while we talked because the relentlessness of Dr. Singh’s
eye contact was a little much for me.
“How have you been?”
“Not great.”
“What’s going on?” she asked. In my peripheral vision, I could see her legs
crossed, black short-heeled shoes, her foot tapping in the air.
“There’s this boy,” I said.
“And?”
“I don’t know. He’s cute and smart and I like him, but I’m not getting any
better, and I just feel like if this can’t make me happy, then what can?”
“I don’t know. What can?”
I groaned. “That’s such a psychiatrist move.”
“Point taken. A change in personal circumstances, even a positive one, can
trigger anxiety. So it wouldn’t be uncommon to feel anxious as you develop a
new relationship. Where are you with the intrusive thoughts?”
“Well, yesterday I was making out with him and had to stop everything
because I couldn’t stop thinking about how gross it was, so not great.”
“About how gross what was?”
“Just how his tongue has its own particular microbiome and once he sticks
his tongue in my mouth his bacteria become part of my microbiome for literally
the rest of my life. Like, his tongue will sort of always be in my mouth until I’m
dead, and then his tongue microbes will eat my corpse.”
“And that made you want to stop kissing him.”
“Well, yeah,” I said.
“That’s not uncommon. So part of you wanted to be kissing him and another
part of you felt the intense worry that comes with being intimate with someone.”
“Right, but I wasn’t worried about intimacy. I was worried about microbial
exchange.”
“Well, your worry expressed itself as being about microbial exchange.”
I just groaned at the therapy bullshit. She asked me if I’d taken my Ativan. I
told her I hadn’t brought it to Davis’s house. And then she asked me if I was
taking the Lexapro every day, and I was, like, not every day. The conversation
devolved into her telling me that medication only works if you take it, and that I
had to treat my health problem with consistency and care, and me trying to
explain that there is something intensely weird and upsetting about the notion
that you can only become yourself by ingesting a medication that changes your
self.
When the conversation paused for a moment, I asked, “Why’d you put up
that picture? Of that guy with the netting?”
“What aren’t you saying? What are you scared to say, Aza?”
I thought about the real question, the one that remained constantly in the
background of my consciousness like a ringing in the ears. I was embarrassed of
it, but also I felt like saying it might be dangerous somehow. Like how you don’t
ever say Voldemort’s name. “I think I might be a fiction,” I said.
“How’s that?”
“Like, you say it’s stressful to have a change in circumstances, right?”
She nodded.
“But what I want to know is, is there a you independent of circumstances? Is
there a way-down-deep me who is an actual, real person, the same person if she
has money or not, the same person if she has a boyfriend or not, the same if she
goes to this school or that school? Or am I only a set of circumstances?”
“I don’t follow how that would make you fictional.”
“I mean, I don’t control my thoughts, so they’re not really mine. I don’t
decide if I’m sweating or get cancer or C. diff or whatever, so my body isn’t
really mine. I don’t decide any of that—outside forces do. I’m a story they’re
telling. I am circumstances.”
She nodded. “Can you apprehend these outside forces?”
“No, I’m not hallucinating,” I said. “It’s . . . like, I’m just not sure that I am,
strictly speaking, real.”
Dr. Singh placed her feet on the floor and leaned forward, her hands on her
knees. “That’s very interesting,” she said. “Very interesting.” I felt briefly proud
to be, for a moment anyway, not not uncommon. “It must be very scary, to feel
that your self might not be yours. Almost a kind of . . . imprisonment?”
I nodded.
“There’s a moment,” she said, “near the end of Ulysses when the character
Molly Bloom appears to speak directly to the author. She says, ‘O Jamesy let me
up out of this.’ You’re imprisoned within a self that doesn’t feel wholly yours,
like Molly Bloom. But also, to you that self often feels deeply contaminated.”
I nodded.
“But you give your thoughts too much power, Aza. Thoughts are only
thoughts. They are not you. You do belong to yourself, even when your thoughts
don’t.”
“But your thoughts are you. I think therefore I am, right?”
“No, not really. A fuller formation of Descartes’s philosophy would be
Dubito, ergo cogito, ergo sum. ‘I doubt, therefore I think, therefore I am.’
Descartes wanted to know if you could really know that anything was real, but
he believed his ability to doubt reality proved that, while it might not be real, he
was. You are as real as anyone, and your doubts make you more real, not less.”
—
The moment I got back home, I could feel Mom’s nerves jangling about my visit
with Dr. Singh, even though she was trying to be calm and normal. “How was
it?” she asked, not looking back at me while grading tests on the couch.
“Good, I guess,” I said.
“I want to apologize again for the way I spoke to Davis yesterday,” she said.
“You have every right to be upset with me.”
“I’m not,” I said.
“But I want you to be cautious, Aza. I can tell your anxiety is increasing—
from your face to your fingertip.”
I balled up my hand and said, “It’s not him.”
“What is it then?”
“There’s no reason,” I said, and turned on the TV, but she took the remote
and muted it.
“You seemed locked inside of your mind, and I can’t know what’s going on
in there, and it scares me.” I pressed my thumbnail against my fingertip through
the Band-Aid, thinking it would scare her a lot more if she could see what was
going on in there.
“I’m fine. Really.”
“But you’re not.”
“Mom, tell me what to say. Seriously. Just . . . tell me what words I can say
to make you calm down about it.”
“I don’t want to calm down. I want you to stop being in pain.”
“Well, that’s not how it works, okay? I have to go read for history.”
I stood up, but before I could get to my room, she said, “Speaking of which,
Mr. Myers told me today that your essay on the Columbian Exchange was the
best he’d seen in all his years of teaching.”
“He’s been teaching like two years,” I said.
“Four, but still,” she said. “You’re going places, Aza Holmes. Big places.”
“Did you ever hear of Amherst?” I asked.
“Where?”
“Amherst. It’s this college in Massachusetts. It’s really good. It’s ranked
really high. I think I might want to go there—if I get in.”
Mom started to say something but swallowed it, and then sighed. “We’ll just
have to see where the scholarships come from.”
“Or Sarah Lawrence,” I said. “That one seems good, too.”
“Well, remember, Aza, a lot of those schools charge you just to apply, so we
have to be selective. The whole process is rigged, from start to finish. They
make you pay to find out you can’t afford to go. We need to be realistic, and
realistically, you’re going to be close to home, okay? And not only because of
money. I don’t think you really want to be halfway across the country from
everything you know.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Okay, I get it. You don’t want to talk to your mother. I love you anyway.”
She blew me a kiss and at last I escaped to my room.
—
I did have to read for history, but after I finished, I wasn’t tired and I kept
thinking about texting Davis.
I knew what I wanted to write, or at least what I was thinking about writing.
I couldn’t stop thinking about the text—writing it out, hitting send knowing I
couldn’t take it back, the sweaty heart-race of waiting for a reply.
I turned off my light, rolled over onto my side, and shut my eyes, but I
couldn’t shake the thought; so I reached over for my phone, clicked it awake,
and wrote him. When you said before that you like my body, what did you mean?
I watched the screen for a few seconds, waiting for the . . . of his reply to
appear, but it didn’t, so I put the phone back onto the bedside table. My brain
was quiet now that I’d done the thing it wanted me to do, and I was nearly asleep
when I heard the phone vibrate.
Him: I mean I like it.
Me: What about it?
Him: I like the way your shoulders slope down into your collarbone.
Him: And I like your legs. I like the curve of your calf.
Him: I like your hands. I like your long fingers and the insides of your
wrists, the color of the skin there, the veins underneath it.
Me: I like your arms.
Him: They’re skinny.
Me: They feel strong actually. Is this okay?
Him: Very.
Me: So, the curve of my calf? I never noticed it.
Him: It’s nice.
Me: Is that it?
Him: I like your ass. I really really like your ass. Is this okay?
Me: Yes.
Him: I want to start a fan blog about your ass.
Me: Okay that’s a little weird.
Him: I want to write fan fiction in which your amazing butt falls in love
with your beautiful eyes.
Me: lol. You are really ruining the moment. You were saying...before...?
Him: That I like your body. I like your stomach and your legs and your
hair and I like. Your. Body.
Me: Really?
Him: Really.
Me: What is wrong with me that texting is fun and kissing is scary?
Him: Nothing is wrong with you. Want to come over after school
Monday? Watch a movie or something?
I paused for a while before finally writing, Sure.
FOURTEEN
IN THE PARKING LOT before school on Monday, I told Daisy about the texting and
the kissing and the eighty million microbes.
“When you put it that way, kissing is actually quite disgusting,” she said.
“On the other hand, maybe his microbes are better than yours, right? Maybe
you’re getting healthier.”
“Maybe.”
“Maybe you’re gonna get superpowers from his microbes. She was a normal
girl until she kissed a billionaire and became . . . MICROBIANCA, Queen of the
Microbes.” I just looked at her. “I’m sorry, is that not helpful?”
“It’ll probably get less weird, right?” I said. “Like, each time we kiss and
nothing bad happens, it’ll get less scary. I mean, it’s not like he’s actually going
to give me campylobacter.” And then after a second, I added, “Probably.”
Daisy started to say something, but then she saw Mychal walking toward her
from across the parking lot. “You’ll be fine, Holmesy. See you at lunch. Love
you!” she said, and then took off toward Mychal. She threw her arms around
him, and kissed him dramatically on the lips, one leg raised at the knee like she
was in a movie or something.
—
I drove over to Davis’s house straight from school. The wrought-iron gates at the
entrance of the driveway were closed, and I had to get out to press the intercom
button.
“Pickett estate,” said a voice I recognized as Lyle’s.
“Hi, it’s Aza Holmes, Davis’s friend,” I said.
He didn’t answer, but the gate began to creak open. I got back in Harold and
drove up the driveway. Lyle was sitting in his golf cart when I arrived next to the
house. “Hi,” I said.
“Davis and Noah are at the pool,” he said. “Can I give you a ride?”
“I can walk,” I said.
“Take the ride,” he responded flatly, gesturing to the space on the cart’s
bench beside him. I sat down, and he set off very slowly toward the pool.
“How’s Davis doing?” he asked me.
“Good, I think.”
“Fragile—that’s what he is. They both are.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“You gotta remember that. You ever lost somebody?”
“I have,” I said.
“Then you know,” he said as we approached the pool. Davis and Noah were
sitting next to each other on the same pool lounger, both hunched forward,
staring at the patio beneath them. I was thinking about Lyle saying then you
know. I didn’t, not really. Every loss is unprecedented. You can’t ever know
someone else’s hurt, not really—just like touching someone else’s body isn’t the
same as having someone else’s body.
When Davis heard the golf cart pull up, he turned his head to me, nodded,
and stood up.
“Hi,” I said.
“Hey. I, uh, need a few minutes here. Sorry, uh, something came up with
Noah. Lyle, why don’t you show Aza around? Show her the lab, maybe? I’ll
meet you there in a bit, okay?”
I nodded and then got back into the golf cart. Lyle took out his cell phone.
“Malik, you got a few minutes to give Davis’s friend a tour? . . . We’ll be there
shortly.” Lyle drove me past the golf course, asking me about my school and my
grades and what my parents did for a living. I told him my mom was a teacher.
“Dad’s not in the picture?”
“He’s dead.”
“Oh. I’m sorry.”
We followed a packed-dirt path through a stand of trees to a rectangular glass
building with a flat roof. A sign outside read LABORATORY.
Lyle walked me to the door and opened it, but then said good-bye. The door
closed behind me, and I saw Malik the Zoologist leaning over a microscope. He
seemed not to have heard me walk in. The room was enormous, with a long
black table in the center, like the ones from chemistry class. There were cabinets
beneath it, and all kinds of equipment on top of the table, including some stuff I
recognized—glass test tubes, bottles of liquids—and a lot of stuff I didn’t. I
walked over toward the table and looked at a circular machine with test tubes
inside of it.
“Sorry about that,” Malik said at last, “but these cells don’t live very long
outside the body, and Tua only weighs a pound and a half, so I try not to take
more blood from her than necessary. That’s a centrifuge.” He walked over and
held up a test tube that contained what looked like blood, then placed it carefully
in a rack of tubes.
“So you’re interested in biology?”
“I guess,” I said.
He looked at the little pool of blood in the bottom of the test tube and said,
“Did you know that tuatara can carry parasites—Tua carries salmonella, for
instance—but they never get sick from them?”
“I don’t know much about tuatara.”
“Few people do, which is a real shame, because they’re by far the most
interesting reptile species. Truly a glimpse into the distant past.” I kept looking
at the tuatara blood.
“It’s hard for us to even imagine how successful they’ve been—tuatara have
been around a thousand times longer than humans. Just think about that. To
survive as long as the tuatara, humans would have to be in the first one-tenth of
one percent of our history.”
“Seems unlikely,” I said.
“Very. Mr. Pickett loves that about Tua—how successful she is. He loves that
at forty, she’s probably still in the first quarter of her life.”
“So he leaves his whole estate to her?”
“I can think of worse uses for a fortune,” Malik said.
I wasn’t sure that I could.
“But what fascinates me most, and is the focus of my research, is their
molecular evolution rate. I apologize if this is boring.” In fact, I liked listening to
him. He was so excited, his eyes wide, like he genuinely loved his work. You
don’t meet a lot of grown-ups like that.
“No, it’s interesting,” I said.
“Have you taken bio?”
“Taking it now,” I said.
“Okay, so you know what DNA is.” I nodded. “And you know that DNA
mutates? That’s what has driven the diversity of life.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“So, look.” He walked over to a microscope connected to a computer and
brought an image of a vaguely circular blob up on the screen. “This is a tuatara
cell. As far as we can tell, tuatara haven’t changed much in the last two hundred
million years, okay? They look the same as their fossils. And tuatara do
everything slowly. They mature slowly—they don’t stop growing until they’re
thirty. They reproduce slowly—they lay eggs only once every four years. They
have a very slow metabolism. But despite doing everything slowly and having
not changed much in two hundred million years, tuatara have a faster rate of
molecular mutation than any other known animal.”
“Like, they’re evolving faster?”
“At a molecular level, yes. They change more rapidly than humans or lions
or fruit flies. Which raises all kinds of questions: Did all animals once mutate at
this rate? What happened to slow down molecular mutation? How does the
animal itself change so little when its DNA is mutating so rapidly?”
“And do you know the answers?”
He laughed. “Oh no no no. Far from it. What I love about science is that as
you learn, you don’t really get answers. You just get better questions.”
I heard a door open behind me. Davis. “Movie?” he asked.
I told Malik thanks for the tour, and he said, “Anytime. Perhaps next time
you’ll be ready to pet her.”
I smiled. “I doubt it.”
Davis and I didn’t hug or kiss or anything; we just walked next to each other
on the dirt path for a while until he said, “Noah got in trouble in school today.”
“What happened?”
“I guess he got caught with some pot.”
“Jesus, I’m sorry. Did he get arrested?”
“Oh, no, they don’t involve the police with stuff like that.” I wanted to tell
him the police sure as hell got involved with stuff like that at White River High
School, but I stayed quiet. “He’s getting suspended, though.”
It was just cold enough that I could see the air steam out of my mouth.
“Maybe that’ll be good for him.”
“Well, he’s been suspended twice before, and it hasn’t helped him so far. I
mean, who brings pot to school when they’re thirteen? It’s like he wants to get in
trouble.”
“I’m sorry,” I said.
“He needs a dad,” Davis said. “Even a shitty dad. And I can’t—like, I have
no fucking idea what to do with him. Lyle tried to talk to him today, but Noah’s
just so monosyllabic—cool, yeah, ’sup, right. I can tell he misses Dad, but I can’t
do anything about it, you know? Lyle isn’t his father. I’m not his father. Anyway,
I just really needed to vent, and you’re the only person I can talk to at the
moment.”
The only rolled over me. I could feel my palms starting to sweat. “Let’s
watch that movie,” I said at last.
—
Down in the theater, he said to me, “I was trying to think of space movies you
might like. This one is ridiculous, but also kind of awesome. If you don’t like it,
you can pick the next ten movies we watch. Deal?”
“Sure,” I said. The movie was called Jupiter Ascending, and it was both
ridiculous and kind of awesome. A few minutes in, I reached over to hold his
hand, and it felt okay. Nice, even. I liked his hands and the way his fingers
intertwined with mine, his thumb turning little circles in the soft skin between
my thumb and forefinger.
As the movie reached one of its many climaxes, I giggled at something
ridiculous and he said, “Are you enjoying this?”
And I said, “Yeah, it’s silly but great.”
I felt like he was still looking at me, so I glanced over at him. “I can’t tell if
I’m misreading this situation,” he said, and the way he was smiling made me
want to kiss him so much. Holding hands felt good when it often hadn’t before,
so maybe this would be different now, too.
I leaned over the sizable armrest between us and kissed him quickly on the
lips, and I liked the warmth of his mouth. I wanted more of it, and I raised my
hand to his cheek and started really kissing him now, and I could feel his mouth
opening, and I just wanted to be with him like a normal person would. I wanted
to feel the brain-fuzzing intimacy I’d felt when texting with him, and I liked
kissing him. He was a good kisser.
But then the thoughts came, and I could feel his spit alive in my mouth. I
pulled away as subtly as I could manage.
“You okay?”
“Yeah,” I said. “Yeah, totally. Just want to . . .” I was trying to think of what
a normal person would say, like maybe if I could just say and do whatever
normal people say and do, then he would believe me to be one, or maybe that I
could even become one.
“Take it slow?” he suggested.
“Yeah,” I said. “Yeah, exactly.”
“Cool.” He nodded toward the movie. “I’ve been waiting for this scene.
You’ll love it. It’s bonkers.”
There’s an Edna St. Vincent Millay poem that’s been rumbling around inside
me ever since I first read it, and part of it goes, “Blown from the dark hill hither
to my door / Three flakes, then four / Arrive, then many more.” You can count
the first three flakes, and the fourth. Then language fails, and you have to settle
in and try to survive the blizzard.
So it was with the tightening spiral of my thoughts: I thought about his
bacteria being inside of me. I thought about the probability that some percentage
of said bacteria were malicious. I thought about the E. coli and campylobacter
and Clostridium difficile that were very likely an ongoing part of Davis’s
microbiota.
A fourth thought arrived. Then many more.
“I have to go to the bathroom,” I said. “I’ll be right back.”
I emerged from the basement to find the dying light of the day shining
through the windows, making the white walls look a little pink. Noah, playing a
video game on the couch, said, “Aza?”
I spun around and entered a bathroom. I washed my face, stared at myself in
the mirror, watching myself breathe. I watched myself for a long time, trying to
figure a way to shut it off, trying to find my inner monologue’s mute button,
trying.
And then I pulled the hand sanitizer out of my jacket and squeezed a glob of
it into my mouth. I gagged a little as I swished the burning slime of it around my
mouth, then swallowed.
—
“You watching Jupiter Ascending?” Noah asked as I left the bathroom.
“Yeah.”
“Dope.” I turned to leave, but then he said, “Aza?” I walked over to him and
sat next to him on the couch.
“Nobody wants to find him.”
“Your dad, you mean?”
“It’s like I can’t think about anything else. I . . . it’s . . . Do you think, like, he
would really disappear and not even text us? Do you think maybe he’s trying and
we just haven’t figured out how to listen?”
I felt so bad for the kid. “Yeah, maybe,” I said. “Or maybe he’s just waiting
until it’s safe.”
“Right,” Noah said. “Yeah, that makes sense. Thanks.” I was starting to
stand up when he said, “But couldn’t he have sent an email? They can’t trace
that stuff if you just use public Wi-Fi. Couldn’t he have texted us from a phone
he picked up somewhere?”
“Maybe he’s scared,” I said. I was trying to help, but maybe there was no
helping.
“Will you keep looking, though?”
“Yeah,” I said. “Yeah, sure, Noah.”
He reached over to pick up his video game controller, my sign to go back
downstairs.
—
Davis had paused the movie in the midst of a starfighter battle, and the bright
light from a suspended explosion was reflected in his glasses as he turned to me.
I sat down next to him, and he asked, “You all right?”
“I’m really sorry,” I said.
“Is there something I should do differen—”
“No, it has nothing to do with you. It’s just, like, I just . . . I can’t talk about
it right now.” My head was spinning, and I was trying to keep my mouth turned
away from him so he wouldn’t smell the hand sanitizer on my breath.
“That’s fine,” he said. “I like us. I like that we’ve got our own way of doing
things.”
“You don’t mean that.”
“I do.” I was staring at the frozen movie screen, waiting for him to un-pause
it. “I overheard you talking to Noah.”
I could still feel his spit in my mouth, and the respite the hand sanitizer had
provided was dwindling away. If I could still feel his spit, it was probably still in
there. You might need to drink more of it. This is ridiculous. Billions of people
kiss, and nothing bad happens to them. You know you’ll feel better if you drink
more.
“He needs to see somebody,” I said. “A psychologist or something.”
“He needs a father.”
Why did you even try to kiss him? You should’ve known. You could’ve had a
normal night, but you chose this. Right now needs to be about Noah, not me. His
bacteria are swimming in you. They’re on your tongue right now. Even pure
alcohol can’t kill them all.
“Do you just want to watch the movie?”
I nodded, and we sat next to each other, close but not touching, for the next
hour, as the spiral tightened.
FIFTEEN
AFTER I GOT HOME THAT NIGHT, I went to bed but not to sleep. I kept starting
texts to him and then not sending them, until finally I put the phone down and
took my laptop out. I was wondering what had happened to Davis’s online life—
where he’d gone once he shut down his social media profiles.
The google hits related to Davis were overwhelmingly about his father
—“Pickett Engineering CEO Reveals in Interview He Won’t Leave a Dime to
His Teenage Children,” etc. Davis hadn’t updated his Instagram, Facebook,
Twitter, or blog since the disappearance, and searches for his two usernames,
dallgoodman and davisnotdave02, turned up only links to other people.
So I started looking for similar usernames: dallgoodman02, davisnotdave,
davisnotdavid, then guessing at Facebook and blog URLs. And then after more
than an hour, just after midnight, it finally occurred to me to search for the
phrase, “the leaves are gone you should be, too.”
A single link came up, to a blog with the username isnotid02. The site had
been created two months earlier, and like Davis’s previous journal, most of the
entries began with a quote from someone else and then concluded with a short,
cryptic essay. But this site also had a tab called poems. I clicked over to the
journal and scrolled down until I reached the first entry:
“In three words I can sum up everything I’ve learned about life: It goes
on.”
—ROBERT FROST
Fourteen days since the mess began. My life isn’t worse, exactly—just
smaller. Look up long enough and you start to feel your infinitesimality.
The difference between alive and not—that’s something. But from
where the stars are watching, there is almost no difference between
varieties of alive, between me and the newly mown grass I’m lying on
right now. We are both astonishments, the closest thing in the known
universe to a miracle.
“And then a Plank in Reason, broke / And I dropped down, and down
—”
—EMILY DICKINSON
There are about a hundred billion stars in the Milky Way—one for every
person who ever lived, more or less. I was thinking about that beneath
the sky tonight, unseasonably warm, as good a showing of stars as one
gets around here. Something about looking up always makes me feel
like I’m falling.
Earlier, I heard my brother crying in his room, and I stood next to
the door for a long time, and I know he knew I was there because he
tried to stop sobbing when the floorboards creaked under my footstep,
and I just stood out there for the longest time, staring at his door, unable
to open it.
“Even the silence / has a story to tell you.”
—JACQUELINE WOODSON
The worst part of being truly alone is you think about all the times you
wished that everyone would just leave you be. Then they do, and you are
left being, and you turn out to be terrible company.
“The world is a globe—the farther you sail, the closer to home you are.”
—TERRY PRATCHETT
Sometimes I open Google Maps and zoom in on random places where
he might be. S came by last night to walk us through what happens now
—what happens if he’s found, what happens if he’s not—and at one
point he said, “You understand that I’m referring now not to the physical
person but to the legal entity.” The legal entity is what hovers over us,
haunting our home. The physical person is in that map somewhere.
“I am in love with the world.”
—MAURICE SENDAK
We always say that we are beneath the stars. We aren’t, of course—there
is no up or down, and anyway the stars surround us. But we say we are
beneath them, which is nice. So often English glorifies the human—we
are whos, other animals are thats—but English puts us beneath the stars,
at least.
Eventually, a she showed up.
“What’s past is prologue.”
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
Seeing your past—or a person from your past—can for me at least be
physically painful. I’m overwhelmed by a melancholic ache—and I want
the past back, no matter the cost. It doesn’t matter that it won’t come
back, that it never even actually existed as I remember it—I want it
back. I want things to be like they were, or like I remember them having
been: Whole. But she doesn’t remind me of the past, for some reason.
She feels present tense.
The next entry was posted late the night he’d given me the money, and more
or less confirmed that the she was me.
“Awake, dear heart, awake. Thou hast slept well. Awake.”
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
I wonder if I fucked it up. But if I hadn’t done it, I’d have wondered
something else. Life is a series of choices between wonders.
“The isle is full of noises.”
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
The thought, would she like me if I weren’t me, is an impossible
thought. It folds in upon itself. But what I mean is would she like me if
the same body and soul were transported into a different life, a lesser
life? But then, of course, I wouldn’t be me. I would be someone else.
The past is a snare that has already caught you. A nightmare, Dedalus
said, from which I am trying to awake.
And then the most recent entry:
“This thing of darkness I / Acknowledge mine.”
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
She noted, more than once, that the meteor shower was happening,
beyond the overcast sky, even if we could not see it. Who cares if she
can kiss? She can see through the clouds.
It was only after reading every journal entry that I noticed the ones about me
began with quotes from The Tempest. I felt like I was invading his privacy, but it
was a public blog, and spending time with his writing felt like spending time
with him, only not as scary. So I clicked over to the poems section.
The first one went:
My mother’s footsteps
Were so quiet
I barely heard her leave.
Another:
You must never let truth get in the way of beauty,
Or so e. e. cummings believed.
“This is the wonder that’s keeping the stars apart,”
He wrote of love and longing.
That often got him laid I’m sure,
Which was the poem’s sole intent.
But gravity differs from affection:
Only one is constant.
And then the first poem, written on the same day as the first journal entry,
two weeks after his father’s disappearance.
He carried me around my whole life—
Picked me up, took me here and there, said
Come with me. I’ll take you. We’ll have fun.
We never did.
You don’t know a father’s weight
Until it’s lifted.
As I reread the poem, my phone buzzed. Davis. Hi.
Me: Hi.
Him: Are you on my blog right now?
Me: . . . Maybe. Is that okay?
Him: I’m just glad it’s you. My analytics said someone from Indianapolis
has been on the site for 30 minutes. I got nervous.
Me: Why?
Him: I don’t want my terrible poems published in the news.
Me: Nobody would do that. Also stop saying your poems are terrible.
Him: How did you find it?
Me: Searched “the leaves are gone you should be too.” Nothing anyone
else would know to search.
Him: Sorry if I sound paranoid I just like posting there and don’t want to
have to delete it.
Him: It was nice to see you tonight.
Me: Yeah.
I saw the . . . that meant he was typing, but no words came, so after a while, I
wrote him.
Me: Do you want to facetime?
Him: Sure.
My fingers were trembling a little when I tapped the button to start a video
call. His face appeared, gray in the ghostlight of his phone, and I held a finger up
to my mouth and whispered, “Shh,” and we watched each other in silence, our
barely discernible faces and bodies exposed through our screens’ dim light, more
intimate than I could ever be in real life.
As I looked at his face looking at mine, I realized the light that made him
visible to me came mostly from a cycle: Our screens were lighting each of us
with light from the other’s bedroom. I could only see him because he could see
me. In the fear and excitement of being in front of each other in that grainy silver
light, it felt like I wasn’t really in my bed and he wasn’t really in his. Instead, we
were together in the non-sensorial place, almost like we were inside the other’s
consciousness, a closeness that real life with its real bodies could never match.
After we hung up, he texted me. I like us. For real.
And somehow, I believed him.
SIXTEEN
AND FOR A WHILE, we found ways to be us—hanging out IRL occasionally, but
texting and facetiming almost every night. We’d found a way to be on a Ferris
wheel without talking about being on a Ferris wheel. Some days I fell deeper
into spirals than others, but changing the Band-Aid sort of worked, and the
breathing exercises and the pills and everything else sort of worked.
And my life continued—I read books and did homework, took tests and
watched TV with my mom, saw Daisy when she wasn’t busy with Mychal, read
and reread that college guide and imagined the array of futures it promised.
And then one night, bored and missing the days when Daisy and I spent half
our lives together at Applebee’s, I read her Star Wars stories.
Daisy’s most recent story, “A Rey of Hot,” had been published the week
before. I was astonished to see it had been read thousands of times. Daisy was
kind of famous.
The story, narrated by Rey, takes place on Tatooine, where lovebirds Rey and
Chewbacca have stopped off to pick up some cargo from an eight-foot-tall dude
named Kalkino. Chewie and Rey are accompanied by a blue-haired girl named
Ayala, whom Rey describes as “my best friend and greatest burden.”
They meet up with Kalkino at a pod race, where Kalkino offers the team two
million credits to take four boxes of cargo to Utapau.
“I’ve got a weird feeling about this,” Ayala said.
I rolled my eyes. Ayala couldn’t get anything right. And the more she
worried, the worse she made everything. She had the moral integrity of a
girl who’d never been hungry, always shitting on the way Chewie and I
made a living without noticing that our work provided her with food and
shelter. Chewie owed Ayala a life debt because her father had died
saving Chewie years ago, and Chewie was a Wookiee of principle even
when it wasn’t convenient. Ayala’s morals were all convenience because
easy living was the only kind of living she’d ever known.
Ayala mumbled, “This isn’t right.” She reached into her mane of
blue hair and plucked out a strand, then twirled it around her finger. A
nervous habit, but then all her habits were nervous.
I kept reading, my gut clenching as I did. Ayala was horrible. She interrupted
Chewie and Rey while they were making out on board the Millennium Falcon
with an annoying question about the hyperdrive “that a reasonably competent
five-year-old could’ve figured out.” She screwed up the shipment by opening
one of the cargo cases, revealing power cells that shot off so much energy they
almost blew up the ship. At one point, Daisy wrote, “Ayala wasn’t a bad person,
just a useless one.”
The story ended with the triumphant delivery of the power cells. But because
one had lost some of its energy when Ayala opened the box, the recipients knew
our intrepid heroes had seen the cargo, and a bounty was placed on their heads—
or should I say our heads—all of which meant the stakes would be even higher
in next week’s story.
There were dozens of comments. The most recent one was, “I LOVE TO
HATE AYALA. THANK YOU FOR BRINGING HER BACK.” Daisy had
replied to that comment with, “Thx! Thx for reading!”
I read through the stories in reverse chronological order and discovered all
the previous ways Ayala had ruined things for Chewie and Rey. The only time
I’d ever done anything worthwhile was when, overcome by anxiety, I threw up
on a Hutt named Yantuh, creating a momentary distraction that allowed Chewie
to grab a blaster and save us from certain death.
—
I stayed up too late reading, and then later still thinking about what I’d say to
Daisy the next morning, my thoughts careening between furious and scared,
circling around my bedroom like a vulture. I woke up the next morning feeling
wretched—not just tired, but terrified. I now saw myself as Daisy saw me—
clueless, helpless, useless. Less.
As I drove to school, my head pounding from sleeplessness, I kept thinking
about how I’d been scared of monsters as a kid. When I was little, I knew
monsters weren’t, like, real. But I also knew I could be hurt by things that
weren’t real. I knew that made-up things mattered, and could kill you. I felt like
that again after reading Daisy’s stories, like something invisible was coming for
me.
I expected the sight of Daisy to piss me off, but when I actually saw her,
sitting on the steps outside school, bundled up against the cold, a gloved hand
waving at me, I felt like—well, like I deserved it, really. Like Ayala was the
thing Daisy had to do to live with me.
She stood up as I approached. “You okay, Holmesy?” Daisy asked. I nodded.
I couldn’t really say anything. My throat felt tight, like I might start to cry.
“What’s wrong?” she asked.
“Just tired,” I said.
“Holmesy, don’t take this the wrong way, but you look like you just got off
work from your job playing a ghoul at a haunted house, and now you’re in a
parking lot trying to score some meth.”
“I’ll be sure not to take that the wrong way.”
She put her arm around me. “I mean, you’re still gorgeous, of course. You
can’t ungorgeous yourself, Holmesy, no matter how hard you try. I’m just saying
you need some sleep. Do some self-care, you know?” I nodded and shrugged off
her embrace. “We haven’t hung out in forever just the two of us,” she said.
“Maybe I can come over later?”
I wanted to tell her no, but I was thinking about how Ayala always said no to
everything, and I didn’t want to be like my fictional self. “Sure.”
“Mychal and I are having a homework night, but I should have about a
hundred and forty-two minutes after school if we go straight to your house,
which just happens to be the running time of Attack of the Clones.”
“A homework night?” I asked.
Mychal appeared from behind me and said, “We’re reading A Midsummer
Night’s Dream to each other for English.”
“. . . seriously?”
“What?” Daisy said. “It’s not my fault we’re adorable. But first, Yoda
lightsaber battling at your house after school. Cool?”
“Cool.”
“It’s a date,” she said.
—
Six hours later, we lay on the floor next to each other, bodies propped up with
couch cushions, and watched Anakin Skywalker and Padmé fall for each other in
extremely slow motion. Daisy considered Attack of the Clones to be the most
underrated Star Wars film. I thought it was kinda crap, but it was fun to watch
Daisy watch it. Her mouth literally moved with each line of dialogue.
I was looking at my phone mostly, scrolling through articles about Pickett’s
disappearance, looking for anything that might connect to joggers or a jogger’s
mouth. I’d meant it when I told Noah I’d keep looking—but the clues we had
just didn’t seem much like clues.
“I want to like Jar Jar, because hating Jar Jar is so cliché, but he was the
worst,” Daisy said. “I actually killed him years ago in my fic. It felt amazing.”
My stomach turned, but I concentrated on my phone. “What are you looking at?”
she asked.
“Just reading about the Pickett investigation, seeing if there’s anything new.
Noah’s really screwed up about it, and I . . . I don’t know. I just want to help him
somehow.”
“Holmesy, we got the reward. It’s over. Your problem is you don’t know
when you’ve won.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“I mean, Davis gave us the reward so that we would drop it. So, drop it.”
“Yeah, okay,” I said. I knew she was right, but she didn’t have to be such an
asshole about it.
I thought the conversation was over, but a few seconds later she paused the
movie and continued talking. “It’s just, like, this isn’t going to be some story
where the poor, penniless girl gets rich and then realizes that truth matters more
than money and establishes her heroism by going back to being the poor,
penniless girl, okay? Everyone’s life is better with Pickett disappeared. Just let it
be.”
“No one’s taking away your money,” I said quietly.
“I love you, Holmesy, but be smart.”
“Got it,” I said.
“Promise?”
“Yeah, I promise.”
“And we break hearts, but we don’t break promises,” she said.
“You say that’s your ‘motto,’ but you spend ninety-nine percent of your time
with Mychal now.”
“Except right now I’m hanging out with you and Jar Jar Binks,” she said.
We went back to watching the movie. As it ended, she squeezed my arm and
said, “I love you,” then raced off to Mychal’s place.
SEVENTEEN
LATER THAT NIGHT, I got a text from Davis.
Him: You around?
Me: I am. You want to facetime?
Him: Could I possibly see you irl?
Me: I guess, but I’m less fun irl.
Him: I like you irl. Is now good?
Me: Now’s good.
Him: Dress warm. It’s cold out, and the sky is clear.
—
Harold and I drove over to the Pickett compound. He’s not much for cold
weather, and it seemed to me I could hear something in his engine tightening up,
but he held it together for me, that blessed car.
The walk from the driveway to Davis’s house was frigid, even in my winter
coat and mittens. You never think much about weather when it’s good, but once
it gets cold enough to see your breath, you can’t ignore it. The weather decides
when you think about it, not the other way around.
As I approached, the front door opened for me. Davis was sitting on the
couch next to Noah, playing their usual starfighter video game. “Hi,” I said.
“Hey,” Davis said.
“’Sup,” Noah added.
“Listen, bud,” Davis said as he stood up. “I’m gonna go for a walk with Aza
before she debundles. Back in a bit, cool?” He reached over and mussed Noah’s
hair.
“Cool,” Noah said.
—
“I read Daisy’s stories,” I told him as we walked. The grass of the golf course
was still cut perfectly short, even though the only golfer in the family had now
been missing for months.
“They’re pretty good, right?”
“I guess. I was distracted by how terrible Ayala is.”
“She’s not all bad. Just anxious.”
“She causes one hundred percent of the problems in the stories.”
He nudged his shoulder against me sweetly. “I kind of liked her, but I guess
I’m biased.”
—
We walked around the whole property until we eventually stopped at the pool.
Davis tapped a button on his phone and the pool cover rolled away. We sat down
on lounge chairs next to each other, and I watched the water from the pool steam
into the cold air as Davis lay back to look up at the sky. “I don’t understand why
he’s so stuck inside himself, when there is this endlessness to fall into.”
“Who is?”
“Noah.” I noticed he’d reached into his coat pocket. He pulled something out
and twirled it in his palm. At first, I thought it might be a pen, but then as he
moved it rhythmically through his fingers, like a magician playing with cards, I
realized it was the Iron Man. “Don’t judge me,” he said. “It’s been a bad week.”
“I just don’t think Iron Man is much of a superh—”
“You’re breaking my heart, Aza. So, you see Saturn up there?” Using his
Iron Man as a pointer, he told me how you can tell the difference between a
planet and a star, and where different constellations were. And he told me that
our galaxy was a big spiral, and that a lot of galaxies were. “Every star we can
see right now is in that spiral. It’s huge.”
“Does it have a center?”
“Yeah,” he said. “Yeah, the whole galaxy is rotating around this
supermassive black hole. But very slowly. I mean, it takes our solar system like
two hundred twenty-five million Earth years to orbit the galaxy.”
I asked him if the spirals of the galaxy were infinite, and he said no, and then
he asked about my spirals.
I told him about this mathematician Kurt Gödel, who had this really bad fear
of being poisoned, so much so that he couldn’t bring himself to eat food unless it
was prepared by his wife. And then one day his wife got sick and had to go into
the hospital, so Gödel stopped eating. I told Davis how even though Gödel
must’ve known that starvation was a greater risk than poisoning, he just couldn’t
eat, and so he starved to death. At seventy-one. He cohabitated with the demon
for seventy-one years, and then it got him in the end.
When I’d finished the story, he asked, “Do you worry that will happen to
you?”
And I said, “It’s so weird, to know you’re crazy and not be able to do
anything about it, you know? It’s not like you believe yourself to be normal. You
know there is a problem. But you can’t figure a way through to fixing it. Because
you can’t be sure, you know? If you’re Gödel, you just can’t be sure your food
isn’t poisoned.”
“Do you worry that will happen to you?” he asked again.
“I worry about a lot of things.”
We kept on talking, for so long that the stars moved above us, until
eventually he asked, “Wanna swim?”
“Bit cold,” I said.
“Pool’s heated,” he answered. He stood up and pulled off his shirt, then
kicked out of his jeans while I watched. I liked watching him take off his jeans.
He was skinny, but I liked his body—the small but sinewy muscles in his back,
his goose-bumped legs. Shivering, he jumped into the water. “Magnificent,” he
said. “I don’t have a bathing suit.”
“Well, if you have a bra and underwear that’s basically a bikini.” I laughed
and took off my coat, then stood up.
“Do you mind turning around?” I asked him. He turned toward the dimly lit
terrarium, where the billionaire-in-waiting was hiding somewhere in her
artificial forest.
I wriggled out of my jeans and pulled off my shirt. I felt naked even though
technically I wasn’t, but I dropped my hands to my sides and said, “Okay, you
can look.” I slid into the warmth of the pool next to him; he put his hands on my
waist under the water, but didn’t try to kiss me.
The terrarium was behind him, and now that my eyes were fully adjusted to
the dark I could see the tuatara on a branch, staring at us through one of her
redblack eyes. “Tua’s watching us,” I said.
“She’s such a perv,” Davis answered, and then turned to look at the animal.
Her green skin had some kind of yellow moss growing on it, and I could see her
teeth as she breathed with her mouth slightly open. Her miniature crocodile tail
flickered suddenly, and Davis startled, curling into me, then laughed. “I hate that
thing,” he said.
—
It was freezing when we got out. We didn’t have any towels, so we carried our
clothes in our arms and ran back to the house. Noah was still on the couch
playing the same game. I hustled past him and jogged up the marble stairs.
Once we were dressed, we went to Davis’s bedroom. He put the Iron Man on
his bedside table, then knelt down to show me how his telescope worked. He
plugged some coordinates into a remote control, and the telescope moved itself.
When it stopped, Davis stooped to look through the lens, then cleared the way
for me.
“That’s Tau Ceti,” he said. The way the telescope was zoomed in, I couldn’t
see anything but darkness and one jittering disk of white light. “Twelve lightyears
away, similar to our sun but a little smaller. Two of its planets actually
might be habitable—probably not, but maybe. It’s my favorite star.” I didn’t
know what I was supposed to be seeing—it was just a circle like any other. But
then he explained.
“I like to look at it and think about how the sun’s light looks to someone in
Tau Ceti’s solar system. Right now, they’re seeing our light from twelve years
ago—in the light they’re seeing, my mom has three years to live. This house has
just been built, and Mom and Dad are always fighting about the layout of the
kitchen. In the light they see, you and I are just kids. We’ve got the best and the
worst of it in front of us.”
“We still have the best and the worst of it in front of us,” I said.
“I hope not,” he said. “I sure as hell hope the worst is behind me.”
I pulled away from Tau Ceti’s twelve-year-old light and looked up at Davis. I
took his hand, and part of me wanted to tell him I loved him, but I wasn’t sure if
I really did. Our hearts were broken in the same places. That’s something like
love, but maybe not quite the thing itself.
It sucked having a dead person in your family, and I knew what he meant,
about seeking solace in the old light. Three years from now, I knew, he’d find a
different favorite star, one with older light to gaze upon. And when time caught
up with that one, he’d love a farther star, and a farther one, because you can’t let
the light catch up with the present. Otherwise you’d forget.
That’s why I liked looking at my dad’s pictures. It was the same thing, really.
Photographs are just light and time.
“I should go,” I said quietly.
“Can I see you this weekend?”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Could we hang out at your house next time, maybe?”
“Sure,” I said. “If you don’t mind being harassed by my mother.”
He assured me he didn’t, and then we hugged good-bye, and as I left him
alone in his room, he knelt back down to the telescope.
—
When I got home that night, I told Mom that Davis wanted to come over this
weekend. “Is he your boyfriend?” she asked.
“I guess so,” I said.
“He respects you as an equal?”
“Yeah.”
“He listens to you as much as you listen to him?”
“Well, I’m not great at talking. But yes. He listens to me. He’s really, really
sweet, and also at some point you just have to trust me, you know?”
She sighed. “All I want in this world is to keep you. Keep you from hurt,
keep you from stress, all that.” I hugged her. “You know I love you.”
I smiled. “Yeah, Mom. I know you love me. You definitely don’t have to
worry about that.”
—
After going to bed that night, I checked in on Davis’s blog.
“Doubt thou that the stars are fire, / Doubt that the sun doth move.”
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
It dothn’t move, of course—well, it does, but not around us. Even
Shakespeare assumed fundamental truths about the fundament that
turned out to be wrong. Who knows what lies I believe, or you do. Who
knows what we shouldn’t doubt.
Tonight, under the sky, she asked me, “Why do all the ones about
me have quotes from The Tempest? Is it because we are shipwrecked?”
Yes. Yes, it is because we are shipwrecked.
I hit refresh after reading it, just in case, and there was a new entry, posted
minutes before.
“There’s an expression in classical music. It goes, ‘We went out to the
meadow.’ It’s for those evenings that can only be described in that way:
There were no walls, there were no music stands, there weren’t even any
instruments. There was no ceiling, there was no floor, we all went out to
the meadow. It describes a feeling.”
—TOM WAITS
I know she’s reading this right now. (Hi.) I felt like we went out to the
meadow tonight, only we weren’t playing music. In the best
conversations, you don’t even remember what you talked about, only
how it felt. It was like we weren’t even there, lying together by the pool.
It felt like we were in some place your body can’t visit, some place with
no ceiling and no walls and no floor and no instruments.
And that really should have ended my evening. But instead of going to sleep,
I decided to torture myself by reading more Ayala stories.
I didn’t understand how Davis could like her. She was horrible—totally selfcentered
and perpetually annoying. At one party scene, Rey observed, “Of
course, when Ayala’s around, it’s never really a party, because at parties, people
have fun.”
Eventually, I clicked away from the site, but I couldn’t bring myself to put
away the computer and go to sleep. Instead, I ended up on Wikipedia, reading
about fan fiction and Star Wars, and then I found myself reading the same old
articles about the human microbiota and studies of how people’s microbial
makeup had shaped and, in some cases, killed them.
At one point, I came across this sentence: “Mammal brains receive a
constant stream of interoceptive input from the GI tract, which combines with
other interoceptive information from within the body and contextual information
from the environment before sending an integrated response to target cells within
the GI tract through what is commonly called the ‘gut-brain informational axis’
but might be better described as the ‘gut-brain informational cycle.’”
I realize that’s not the sort of sentence that fills most people with horror, but
it stopped me cold. It was saying that my bacteria were affecting my thinking—
maybe not directly, but through the information they told my gut to send to my
brain. Maybe you’re not even thinking this thought. Maybe your thinking’s
infected. Shouldn’t’ve been reading these articles. Should’ve gone to sleep. Too
late now.
I checked the light under the door to make sure Mom had gone to sleep and
then snuck over to the bathroom. I changed the Band-Aid, looking carefully at
the old one. There was blood. Not a lot, but blood. Faintly pink. It isn’t infected.
It bleeds because it hasn’t scabbed over. But it could be. It isn’t. Are you sure?
Did you even clean it this morning? Probably. I always clean it. Are you sure?
Oh, for fuck’s sake.
I washed my hands, put on a new Band-Aid, but now I was being pulled all
the way down. I opened the medicine cabinet quietly. Took out the aloe-scented
hand sanitizer. I took a gulp, then another. Felt dizzy. You can’t do this. This
shit’s pure alcohol. It’ll make you sick. Better do it again. Poured some more of
it on my tongue. That’s enough. You’ll be clean after this. Just get one last
swallow down. I did. Heard my gut rumbling. Stomach hurt.
Sometimes you clear out the healthy bacteria and that’s when C. diff comes
in. You gotta watch out for that. Great, you tell me to drink it, then tell me not to.
Back in my room, sweating over the covers, body clammy, corpse-like. Can’t
get my head straight. Drinking hand sanitizer is not going to make you healthier,
you crazy fuck. But they can talk to your brain. THEY can tell your brain what
to think, and you can’t. So, who’s running the show? Stop it, please.
I tried not to think the thought, but like a dog on a leash I could only get so
far from it before I felt the strangling pull against my throat. My stomach
rumbled.
Nothing worked. Even giving in to the thought had only provided a
moment’s release. I returned to a question Dr. Singh had first asked me years
ago, the first time it got this bad: Do you feel like you’re a threat to yourself? But
which is the threat and which is the self? I wasn’t not a threat, but couldn’t say to
whom or what, the pronouns and objects of the sentence muddied by the
abstraction of it all, the words sucked into the non-lingual way down. You’re a
we. You’re a you. You’re a she, an it, a they. My kingdom for an I.
Felt myself slipping, but even that’s a metaphor. Descending, but that is, too.
Can’t describe the feeling itself except to say that I’m not me. Forged in the
smithy of someone else’s soul. Please just let me out. Whoever is authoring me,
let me up out of this. Anything to be out of this.
But I couldn’t get out.
Three flakes, then four arrive.
Then many more.
EIGHTEEN
MOM WOKE ME UP AT 6:50. “Sleep through your alarm?” she asked.
I squinted. It was still dark in my room. “I’m fine,” I said.
“You sure?”
“Yeah,” I said, and pulled myself out of bed.
I was at school just thirty-two minutes later. I didn’t look my best, but I’d
long ago given up trying to impress the student body of White River High
School.
Daisy was sitting alone on the front steps. “You look sleepy,” she said as I
walked up. It was cloudy, the kind of day where the sun is a supposition.
“Long night. How are you?”
“Great, except I haven’t seen nearly enough of my best friend lately. You
want to hang out later? Applebee’s?”
“Sure,” I said.
“Also, my mom had to borrow my car, so can we just go together?”
—
I made it through lunch, through the standard post-lunch encounter with Mom
worrying over my “tired eyes,” through history and statistics. In each room the
soul-sucking fluorescent light coated everything in a film of sickness, and the
day droned on until the final bell released me at last. I made it to Harold, sat
down in the driver’s seat, and waited for Daisy.
I hadn’t been sleeping much. Hadn’t been thinking straight. That sanitizer is
basically pure alcohol; you can’t keep drinking that. Should probably call Dr.
Singh, but then you’ll have to talk to her answering service and tell a stranger
that you’re crazy. Can’t bear the thought of Dr. Singh calling back, voice tinged
with sympathy, asking whether I’m taking the medication every day. Doesn’t
work anyway. Nothing does. Three different medications and five years of
cognitive behavioral therapy later, and here we are.
—
I startled awake at the sound of Daisy opening the passenger door. “You okay?”
she asked.
“Yeah,” I said. I turned the car on. Felt my spine straightening. I reversed out
of the parking spot and then waited in line to leave campus. “You barely even
changed my name,” I said. My voice felt squeaky, but I was finding it.
“Huh?”
“Ayala, Aza. Beginning of the alphabet to the end and back. Gave her
compulsions. Gave her my personality. Anyone reading it would know how you
really feel about me. Mychal. Davis. Everyone at school, probably.”
“Aza,” Daisy said. My real name sounded wrong in her voice. “You’re not
—”
“Oh, fuck off.”
“I’ve been writing them since I was eleven, and you’ve never read a single
one.”
“You never asked.”
“First, I did ask. A bunch of times. And then I got tired of you saying you’d
read them and never doing it. And second, I shouldn’t have to ask. You could
take three seconds away from your nonstop fucking contemplation of yourself to
think about other people’s interests. Look, I came up with Ayala in like seventh
grade. And it was a dick move, but she’s her own character now. She’s not you,
okay?” We were still inching our way through the student parking lot. “I mean, I
love you, and it’s not your fault, but your anxiety does kind of invite disasters.”
At last I pulled off campus and headed north up Meridian toward the
highway. She kept talking, of course. She always did. “I’m sorry, okay? I
should’ve let Ayala die years ago. But yeah, you’re right, it is kind of a way of
coping with—I mean, Holmesy, you’re exhausting.”
“Yeah, all our friendship has gotten you in the last couple months is fifty
thousand dollars and a boyfriend. You’re right, I’m a terrible person. What’d you
call me in that story? Useless. I’m useless.”
“Aza, she’s not you. But you are . . . extremely self-centered. Like, I know
you have the mental problems and whatever, but they do make you . . . you
know.”
“I don’t know, actually. They make me what?”
“Mychal said once that you’re like mustard. Great in small quantities, but
then a lot of you is . . . a lot.”
I didn’t say anything.
“I’m sorry. I shouldn’t’ve said that.”
We were stopped at a red light, and when it turned green I was somewhat
ungentle with Harold’s accelerator. I could feel the heat in my cheeks, but
couldn’t tell if I was about to start crying or screaming. Daisy kept going. “But
you know what I mean. Like, what are my parents’ names?”
I didn’t answer. I didn’t know the answer. I just took a long breath, trying to
push my heartbeat down into my chest. I didn’t need Daisy to point out what a
shitshow I was. I knew.
“What are their jobs? When was the last time you were at my apartment—
five years ago? We’re supposed to be best friends, Holmesy, and you don’t even
know if I have any fucking pets. You have no idea what it’s like for me, and
you’re so, like, pathologically uncurious that you don’t even know what you
don’t know.”
“You have a cat,” I whispered.
“You just have no fucking clue. It’s all so fucking easy for you. I mean, you
think you and your mom are poor or whatever, but you got braces. You got a car
and a laptop and all that shit, and you think it’s natural. You think it’s just
normal to have a house with your own room and a mom who helps you with
your homework. You don’t think you’re privileged, but you have everything.
You don’t know what it’s like for me, and you don’t ask. I share a room with my
annoying eight-year-old sister whose name you don’t know and then you judge
me for buying a car instead of saving it all for college, but you don’t know. You
want me to be some selfless, proper heroine who’s too good for money, but that’s
bullshit, Holmesy. Being poor doesn’t purify you or whatever the fuck. It just
sucks. You don’t know my life. You haven’t taken the time to find out, and you
don’t get to judge me.”
“Her name is Elena,” I said quietly.
“You think it’s hard for you and I’m sure it is from inside your head, but . . .
you can’t get it, because your privileges are just oxygen to you. I thought the
money, I thought it would make us the same. I’ve always been trying to keep up
with you, trying to type as fast on my phone as you can on your laptop, and I
thought it would make us closer, but it just made me feel . . . like you’re spoiled,
kinda. Like, you’ve had this all along, and you can’t even know how much easier
it makes everything, because you don’t ever think about anybody else’s life.”
I felt like I might throw up. We merged onto the highway. My head was
careening—I hated myself, hated her, thought she was right and wrong, thought I
deserved it and didn’t.
“You think it’s easy for me?”
“I don’t mean—”
I turned to her. “STOP TALKING. Jesus Christ, you haven’t shut up in ten
years. I’m sorry it’s not fun hanging out with me because I’m stuck in my head
so much, but imagine being actually stuck inside my head with no way out, with
no way to ever take a break from it, because that’s my life. To use Mychal’s
clever little analogy, imagine eating NOTHING BUT mustard, being stuck with
mustard ALL THE TIME and if you hate me so much then stop asking me to—”
“HOLMESY!” she shouted, but too late. I looked up only in time to see that
I’d kept accelerating while the traffic had slowed. I couldn’t even get my foot to
the brake before we slammed into the SUV in front of us. A moment later,
something slammed into us from behind. Tires screeching. Honking. Another
crash, this one smaller. Then silence.
I was trying to catch my breath, but I couldn’t, because every breath hurt.
I swore, but it just came out as ahhhhggg. I reached for the door only to
realize my seat belt was still on. I looked over at Daisy, who was looking back at
me. “Are you okay!” she shouted. I realized I was groaning with each
exhalation. My ears were ringing. “Yeah,” I said. “You?” The pain made me feel
dizzy. Darkness encroached at the edge of my vision. “I think so,” she said. The
world narrowed into a tunnel as I struggled for breath. “Stay in the car, Holmesy.
You’re hurt. Do you have your phone? We gotta call 911.”
The phone. I unbuckled my seat belt and pushed my door open. I tried to
stand, but the pain brought me back into Harold’s seat. Fuck. Harold. A woman
wearing a business suit knelt down to my eye level. She told me not to move, but
I had to. I lifted myself up, and the pain blinded me for a minute, but then the
black dots scattered so I could see the damage.
Harold’s trunk was as crumpled as his hood—he looked like a seismograph
reading, except for the passenger compartment, which was perfectly intact. He
never failed me, not even when I failed him.
I leaned on Harold’s side as I staggered back to the trunk. I tried to lift the
trunk gate, but it was crushed. I started pounding on the trunk with my hands,
screaming with every breath, “Fuck oh God, oh God, oh God. He’s totaled. He’s
totaled.”
“You’re kidding me,” Daisy said as she walked to the back of Harold.
“You’re upset about the goddamned car? It’s a car, Holmesy. We almost died,
and you’re worried about your car?”
I pounded on the trunk again, until Harold’s license plate slid off, but I
couldn’t get it open.
“Are you crying about the car?”
I could see the latch; I just couldn’t get it pried open, and whenever I tried to
lift, the pain in my ribs made my vision cloud up, but I finally wrested the trunk
open enough to reach my arm inside. I fumbled around until I found my dad’s
phone. The screen was shattered.
I held the power button to turn it on, but beneath the branches of broken
glass, the screen only glowed a cloudy gray. I pulled myself back to the driver’sside
door and slumped into Harold’s seat, my forehead on the steering wheel.
I knew the pictures were backed up, that nothing had really been lost. But it
was his phone, you know? He’d held it, talked into it. Taken my picture with it.
I ran my thumb across the shattered glass and cried until I felt a hand on my
shoulder. “My name’s Franklin. You’ve been in a car accident. I’m a firefighter.
Try not to move. An ambulance is on its way. What’s your name?”
“Aza. I’m not hurt.”
“Just hang tight for me, Aza. Do you know what day it is?”
“It’s my dad’s phone,” I said. “This is his phone, and . . .”
“Is this his car? Are you worried he’ll be upset? Aza, I’ve been doing this for
a long time, and I can promise, your dad’s not mad at you. He’s relieved you’re
okay.”
I felt like I was getting ripped apart from the inside, the supernova of my
selves simultaneously exploding and collapsing. It hurt to cry, but I hadn’t cried
in so long, and I didn’t really want to stop. “Where are you having pain?” he
asked.
I pointed toward the right side of my rib cage. A woman approached, and
they began a conversation about whether I’d need a backboard. I tried to say that
I felt dizzy and then felt myself falling, even though there was really nowhere to
fall.
—
I woke up staring at the ceiling of an ambulance, strapped to a backboard, a man
holding an oxygen mask over my face, the sirens distant, my ears still ringing.
Then falling again, down and down, and then on a hospital bed in a hallway,
Mom over me, makeup dripping from her red eyes. “My baby, oh Lord. Baby,
are you all right?”
“I’m fine,” I said. “I think I just cracked a rib or something. Dad’s phone is
broken.”
“It’s okay. We have everything backed up. They called me and told me you
were hurt but they didn’t tell me if you were . . .” she said, and then started
crying. She sort of collapsed into Daisy, which is when I noticed Daisy was
there, a red welt on her collarbone.
I turned away from them and looked up at the bright fluorescent light above
my bed, feeling the hot tears on my face, and finally my mom said, “I can’t lose
you, too.”
A woman came in and took me away to get a CT scan, and I was sort of
relieved to be away from both my mom and Daisy for a while, not to feel the
swirl of fear and guilt over being such a failure as a daughter and a friend.
“Car accident?” the woman asked as she pushed me past the word kindness
painted in calligraphy on the wall.
“Yeah,” I said.
“Those seat belts will hurt ya while saving your life,” she said.
“Yeah. Am I gonna need antibiotics?”
“I’m not your doctor. She’ll be in after we get the test.”
They put something in my IV that made me feel like I was pissing my pants,
then ran me through the cylinder of the CT machine, and eventually returned me
to the shivering nerves of my mother. I couldn’t shake the crack in her voice
when she said she couldn’t lose me, too. I felt her nerves as she paced around the
room, texting with my aunt and uncle in Texas, pressing long breaths through
pursed lips, dabbing at her eye makeup with a tissue.
Daisy didn’t say much, for once. “It’s okay if you want to go home,” I said
to her at one point.
“Do you want me to go home?” she asked.
“Up to you,” I said. “Seriously.”
“I’ll stay,” she answered, and sat quietly, her eyes glancing from me to my
mom and back again.
NINETEEN
“GOOD NEWS AND BAD NEWS,” announced a woman in navy-blue scrubs upon
entering the room. “Bad news, you have a lacerated liver. Good news, it’s a mild
laceration. We’ll watch you closely for a couple days, so we can make sure your
bleeding doesn’t increase, and you’ll be sore for several weeks, but I’m ordering
you pain medication now so you’ll be comfortable. Questions.”
“She’s going to be okay?” my mom asked.
“Yes. If the bleeding worsens, surgery will be necessary, but based on the
radiologist’s report, I think that’s very unlikely. As liver lacerations go, this is
about as good as they get. Your daughter is really quite lucky, in the scheme of
things.”
“She’s going to be okay,” my mom said again.
“As I said, we’ll keep a close eye on her for a couple days, and then she’ll
have about a week of bed rest. Within six or so weeks, she should be her old
self.”My mother dissolved into tears of gratitude as I turned over that phrase, her
old self. “Do I need antibiotics?” I asked.
“You shouldn’t. If we had to do surgery, you would, but as of now, no.” A
shiver of relief rolled through me. No antibiotics. No increased risk of C. diff.
Just needed to get the hell out of here, then.
The doctor asked me about my medications, and I told her. She made some
notes in the chart and then said, “Someone will be by shortly to take you
upstairs, and we’ll get you something for the pain before that.”
“Wait,” I said. “What do you mean upstairs?”
“As I said, you’ll need to spend a couple nights here so that you can—”
“Wait, no no no no. I can’t stay in the hospital.”
“Baby,” my mom said. “You have to.”
“No, I really can’t. I really, this is, like, the one place I absolutely cannot stay
tonight. Please. Just let us go home.”
“That would be inadvisable.”
Oh no. Listen, it’s okay. Most people admitted to the hospital go home
healthier than they left it. Almost everyone, really. C. diff infections are only
common in postsurgical patients. You won’t even be on antibiotics. Oh no no no
no no no no.
—
Of all the places to end up in the tightening gyre, here we were, on the fourth
floor of a hospital in Carmel, Indiana.
Daisy left once I’d gotten upstairs but Mom stayed, lying on her side in the
reclining chair next to my hospital bed, facing me.
I could feel her breath on me that night as she slept, her lips parted, smudged
eyes closed, the microbes from her lungs floating across my cheek. I couldn’t
roll over onto my side because even with the medication the pain was
paralyzing, and when I turned my head, her breath just blew my hair across my
face, so I lived with it.
She stirred, her eyes locked to mine. “You okay?”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Does it hurt?” I nodded. “You know Sekou Sundiata, in a poem, he said the
most important part of the body ‘ain’t the heart or the lungs or the brain. The
biggest, most important part of the body is the part that hurts.’” Mom put her
hand on my wrist and fell back asleep.
Even though I was pretty high on morphine or whatever, I couldn’t sleep. I
could hear beeping in the rooms next to mine, and it wasn’t particularly dark,
and well-meaning strangers kept showing up to pull blood out of my body and/or
check my blood pressure, and most of all, I knew: I knew that C. diff was
invading my body, that it was floating in the air. On my phone, I paged through
patients’ stories of how they went into the hospital for a gallbladder surgery or a
kidney stone, and they’d come out destroyed.
The thing about C. diff is that it’s inside of everyone. We all have it, lurking
there; it’s just that sometimes it grows out of control and takes over and begins
attacking your insides. Sometimes it just happens. Sometimes it happens because
you ingest someone else’s C. diff, which is slightly different from your own, and
it starts mixing with yours, and boom.
I felt these little jolts through my arms and legs as my brain whirred through
thoughts, trying to figure out how to make this okay. My IV line beeping.
Couldn’t even say when I last changed the Band-Aid on my finger. The C. diff
both inside me and around me. It could survive months outside a body, waiting
for a new host. The combined weight of all large animals in the world—human,
cow, penguin, shark—is around 1.1 billion tons. The combined weight of the
earth’s bacteria is 400 billion tons. They overwhelm us.
For some reason, I started hearing that song “Can’t Stop Thinking About
You” in my head. The more I thought about that song, the weirder it got. Like,
the chorus—can’t stop can’t stop can’t stop thinking about you—imagines that it
is somehow sweet or romantic to be unable to turn your thoughts away from
someone, but there’s nothing romantic or pretty about a boy thinking about you
the way you think about C. diff. Can’t stop thinking. Trying to find something
solid to hold on to in this rolling sea of thought. The spiral painting. Daisy hates
you and she should. Davis’s microbe-soaked tongue on your neck. Your mom’s
warm breaths. Hospital gown clinging to your back soaked with sweat. And in
the way-down deep, some me screaming, get me out of here get me out of here
get me out please I’ll do anything, but the thoughts just keep spinning, the
tightening gyre, the jogger’s mouth, the stupidity of Ayala, Aza, and Holmesy
and all my irreconcilable selves, my self-absorption, the filth in my gut, think
about anything other than yourself you disgusting narcissist.
I took my phone and texted Daisy: I’m so sorry I haven’t been a good friend.
I can’t stop thinking about it.
She wrote back immediately: It’s fine. How are you?
Me: I do care about your life and I’m sorry I haven’t shown it.
Daisy: Holmesy calm down everything is fine I’m sorry we fought we’ll
make up it will be fine.
Me: I’m just really sorry. I can’t think straight.
Daisy: Stop apologizing. Are you on sweet pain meds?
I didn’t reply, but I couldn’t stop thinking about Daisy, about Ayala, and
most of all about the bugs inside and outside of me, and I knew I was being
selfish by even making a big deal out of it, making other people’s real C. diff
infections about my hypothetical one. Reprehensible. Pinched my finger with my
thumbnail to attest to this moment’s reality, but can’t escape myself. Can’t kiss
anyone, can’t drive a car, can’t function in the actual sensate populated world.
How could I even fantasize about going to some school far away where you pay
a fortune to live in dorms full of strangers, with communal bathrooms and
cafeterias and no private spaces to be crazy in? I’d be stuck here for college, if I
could ever get my thinking straightened enough to attend. I’d live in my house
with Mom, and then afterward, too. I could never become a functioning grownup
like this; it was inconceivable that I’d ever have a career. In job interviews
they’d ask me, What’s your greatest weakness? and I’d explain that I’ll probably
spend a good portion of the workday terrorized by thoughts I’m forced to think,
possessed by a nameless and formless demon, so if that’s going to be an issue,
you might not want to hire me.
Thoughts are just a different kind of bacteria, colonizing you. I thought about
the gut-brain information axis. Maybe you’re already gone. The prisoners run
the jail now. Not a person so much as a swarm. Not a bee, but the hive.
I couldn’t stand my mother’s breath on my face. My palms were sweating. I
felt my self slipping away. You know how to deal with this. “Can you turn over?”
I whispered, but she responded only with breath. You just need to stand up.
I picked up my phone to text Daisy, but now the letters blurred out on the
screen, and the full panic gripped me. See the hand sanitizer mounted on the wall
near the door. It’s the only way that’s stupid if it worked alcoholics would be the
healthiest people in the world you’re just going to sanitize your hands and your
mouth please fucking think about something else stand up I HATE BEING
STUCK INSIDE YOU you are me I am not you are we I am not you want to feel
better you know how to feel better it’ll just make me barf you’ll be clean you can
be sure I can never be sure stand up not even a person just a deeply flawed line
of reasoning you want to stand up the doctor said stay in bed and the last thing
needed is a surgery you will get up and wheel your IV cart let me up out of this
wheel your IV cart to the front of the room please and you will pump the hand
sanitizer foam into your hands, clean them carefully, and then you will pump
more foam into your hands and you will put that foam in your mouth, swish it
around your filthy teeth and gums. But that stuff has alcohol in it that my
damaged liver will have to process DO YOU WANT TO DIE OF C. DIFF no but
this is not rational THEN GET UP AND WHEEL YOUR IV CART TO THE
CONTAINER OF HAND SANITIZER MOUNTED ON THE GODDAMNED
WALL YOU IDIOT. Please let me go. I’ll do anything. I’ll stand down. You can
have this body. I don’t want it anymore. You will stand up. I will not. I am my
way not my will. You will stand up. Please. You will go to the hand sanitizer.
Cogito, ergo non sum. Sweating you already have it nothing hurts like this
you’ve already got it stop please God stop you’ll never be free of this you’ll
never be free of this you’ll never get your self back you’ll never get your self
back do you want to die of this do you want to die of this because you will you
will you will you will you will you will.
I pulled myself to standing. For a moment, I thought I might faint as the pain
blazed through me. I grabbed hold of the IV pole and took a few shuffling steps.
I heard my mom stirring. I didn’t care. Pressed the dispenser, rubbed the foam all
through my hands. Pressed it again, and shoved a scoop of it into my mouth.
“Aza, what are you doing?” my mom asked. I was so fucking embarrassed,
but I did it again, because I had to. “Aza, stop it!”
I heard my mom getting up, and knew my window was closing, so I took a
third shot of the foam and stuffed it into my mouth, gagging. A spasm of nausea
lurched through me, and I vomited, the pain in my ribs blinding, as Mom
grabbed me by the arm. There was yellow bile all over my pale blue hospital
gown.
A voice came from inside a speaker somewhere behind me. “This is Nurse
Wallace.”
“My daughter is vomiting. I think she drank hand sanitizer.”
I knew how disgusting I was. I knew. I knew now for sure. I wasn’t
possessed by a demon. I was the demon.
TWENTY
THE NEXT MORNING, you wake up in a hospital bed, staring up at ceiling tiles.
Gingerly, carefully, you assess your own consciousness for a moment. You
wonder, Is it over?
“The hospital food didn’t look so good, so I made you some breakfast,” your
mother says. “Cheerios.” You look down at your body, rendered mostly formless
by a bleached white blanket.
You say, “Cheerios aren’t something you make,” and your mom laughs. At
the end of your bed you see a huge bouquet of flowers resting on a table,
ostentatiously huge, complete with a crystal vase. “From Davis,” your mother
says. Nearer to you, hovering above your formless body, a tray of food. You
swallow. You look at the Cheerios, bobbing in milk. Your body hurts. A thought
crosses your mind: God only knows what you inhaled while you were asleep.
It’s not over.
You lie there, not even thinking really, except to try to consider how to
describe the hurt, as if finding the language for it might bring it up out of you. If
you can make something real, if you can see it and smell it and touch it, then you
can kill it.
You think, it’s like a brain fire. Like a rodent gnawing at you from the inside.
A knife in your gut. A spiral. Whirlpool. Black hole.
The words used to describe it—despair, fear, anxiety, obsession—do so little
to communicate it. Maybe we invented metaphor as a response to pain. Maybe
we needed to give shape to the opaque, deep-down pain that evades both sense
and senses.
For a moment, you think you’re better. You’ve just had a successful train of
thought, with an engine and a caboose and everything. Your thoughts. Authored
by you. And then you feel a wave of nausea, a fist clenching from within your
rib cage, cold sweat hot forehead you’ve got it it’s already inside of you crowding
out everything else taking you over and it’s going to kill you and eat its way out
of you and then in a small voice, half strangled by the ineffable horror, you
barely squeeze out the words you need to say. “I’m in trouble, Mom. Big
trouble.”
TWENTY-ONE
THE ARC OF THE STORY GOES LIKE THIS: Having descended into proper madness, I
begin to make the connections that crack open the long-dormant case of Russell
Pickett’s disappearance. My dogged obsessiveness leads me to ignore all manner
of threats, and the risk to the fortune Daisy and I have stumbled into. I focus
only on the mystery, and embrace the belief that solving it is the ultimate Good,
that declarative sentences are inherently better than interrogative ones, and in
finding the answer despite my madness, I simultaneously find a way to live with
the madness. I become a great detective, not in spite of my brain circuitry, but
because of it.
I’m not sure who I walk into the sunset with in the proper story, Davis or
Daisy, but I walk into it. You see me backlit, an eclipse silhouetted by the eightminute-
old light of our home star, holding hands with somebody.
And along the way, I realize that I have agency over myself, that my
thoughts are—as Dr. Singh liked to say—only thoughts. I realize that my life is a
story that I’m telling, and I’m free and empowered and the captain of my
consciousness and yeah, no. That’s not how it went down.
I did not become dogged or declarative, nor did I walk off into the sunset—
in fact, for a while there, I saw hardly any natural light at all.
What happened was relentlessly and excruciatingly dull: I lay in a hospital
bed and hurt. My ribs hurt, my brain hurt, my thoughts hurt, and they did not let
me go home for eight days.
At first, they figured me for an alcoholic—that I’d gone for the hand
sanitizer because I was so desperate for a drink. The truth was so much weirder
and less rational that nobody really seemed to buy it until they contacted Dr.
Singh. When she arrived at the hospital, she pulled a chair up to the edge of my
bed. “Two things happened,” she said. “First, you’re not taking your medication
as prescribed.”
I told her I’d taken it almost every day, which felt true, but wasn’t. “I felt like
it was making me worse,” I eventually confessed.
“Aza, you’re an intelligent young woman. Surely you don’t think drinking
hand sanitizer while hospitalized for a lacerated liver marks forward progress in
your mental health journey.” I just stared at her. “As I’m sure they explained to
you, drinking hand sanitizer is dangerous—not only because of the alcohol, but
because it contains chemicals that when ingested can kill you. So we’re not
moving forward with the idea that the medicine you stopped taking was making
you worse.” She said it all so forcefully that I just nodded.
“And the second thing that happened is that you experienced in the accident
a serious trauma, and this would be challenging for anyone.” I kept staring. “We
need to get you on a different medication, one that works better for you, that you
can tolerate, and that you’ll take.”
“None of them work.”
“None of them have worked yet,” she corrected.
—
Dr. Singh came by each morning, and then in the afternoon another doctor
visited to assess my liver situation. Both were a relief if for no other reason than
my omnipresent mother was forced to leave the room briefly.
On the last day, Dr. Singh sat down next to the side of my bed and placed a
hand on my shoulder. She’d never touched me before. “I recognize that a
hospital setting has probably not been great for your anxiety.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“Do you feel you are a threat to yourself?”
“No,” I said. “I’m just really scared and having a lot of invasives.”
“Did you consume hand sanitizer yesterday?”
“No.”
“I’m not here to judge you, Aza. But I can only help if you’re being honest.”
“I am being honest. I haven’t.” For one thing, they’d taken the wall-mounted
sanitizer station out of my room.
“Have you thought about it?”
“Yeah.”
“You don’t have to be afraid of that thought. Thought is not action.”
“I can’t stop thinking about getting C. diff. I just want to be sure that I’m
not . . .”
“Drinking hand sanitizer won’t help.”
“But what will help?”
“Time. Treatment. Taking your meds.”
“I feel like a noose is tightening around me and I want out, but struggling
only cinches the knot. The spiral just keeps tightening, you know?”
She looked me dead in the eye. I thought she might cry or something, the
way she was looking at me. “Aza, you’re going to survive this.”
—
Even after they let me go home, Dr. Singh still came to my house twice a week
to check on my progress. I had switched to a different medication, which Mom
made sure I took every morning, and I wasn’t allowed to get up except to go to
the bathroom lest I re-lacerate my liver.
I was out of school for two weeks. Fourteen days of my life reduced to one
sentence, because I can’t describe anything that happened during those days. It
hurt, all the time, in a way language could not touch. It was boring. It was
predictable. Like walking a maze you know has no solution. It’s easy enough to
say what it was like, but impossible to say what it was.
Daisy and Davis both tried to visit, but I wanted to be alone, in bed. I didn’t
read or watch TV; neither could adequately distract me. I just lay there, almost
catatonic, as my mother hovered, perpetually near, breaking the silence every
few minutes with a question-phrased-as-a-statement. Each day is a little better?
You’re feeling okay? You’re improving? The inquisition of declarations.
I didn’t even turn on my phone for a while, a decision endorsed by Dr.
Singh. When I finally did power it up, I felt an insoluble fear. I both wanted to
find a lot of text messages and didn’t.
Turns out I had over thirty messages—not just from Daisy and Davis,
although they had written, but also from Mychal and other friends, and even
some teachers.
—
I returned to school on a Monday morning in early December. I wasn’t sure if
the new medication was working, but I also wasn’t wondering whether to take it.
I felt ready, like I had returned to the world—not my old self, but myself
nonetheless.
Mom drove me to school. Harold had been totaled, and anyway, I was too
scared of driving.
“Excited or nervous?” Mom asked me. She drove with both hands on the
steering wheel, ten and two o’clock.
“Nervous,” I said.
“Your teachers, your friends, they all understand, Aza. They just want you
well and will support you one hundred percent, and if they don’t, I will crush
them.”
I smiled a little. “Everyone knows, is all. That I went crazy or whatever.”
“Oh, sweetie,” she said. “You didn’t go crazy. You’ve always been crazy.”
Now I laughed, and she reached over to squeeze my wrist.
Daisy was waiting on the front steps. Mom stopped the car, and I got out, the
weight of the backpack still tender against my ribs. It was a cold day, but the sun
was bright even though it had just risen, and I kept blinking away the light. It
had been a while since I’d spent much time outside.
Daisy looked different. Her face brighter somehow. It took me a second to
realize she’d gotten a haircut, a just-under-the-chin bob that looked really good.
“Can I hug you without lacerating your liver?”
“I like the new hairstyle,” I said as we hugged.
“You’re sweet, but we both know it’s a disaster.”
“Listen,” I said. “I’m really sorry.”
“Me too, but we have forgiven each other and now we will live happily ever
after.”
“Seriously, though,” I said. “I feel terrible about—”
“I do, too,” she said. “You gotta read my new story, man. It’s a fifteenthousand-
word apology set on postapocalyptic Jedha. What I want to say to you,
Holmesy, is that yes, you are exhausting, and yes, being your friend is work. But
you are also the most fascinating person I have ever known, and you are not like
mustard. You are like pizza, which is the highest compliment I can pay a
person.”
“I’m just really sorry, Daisy, for not being—”
“Jesus Christ, Holmesy, you can sure hold a grudge against yourself. You are
my favorite person. I want to be buried next to you. We’ll have a shared
tombstone. It’ll read, ‘Holmesy and Daisy: They did everything together, except
the nasty.’ Anyway, how are you?” I shrugged. “Want me to keep talking?” I
nodded. “You know how sometimes people will say, like, oh, she really loves the
sound of her voice? I do seriously love the sound of my voice. I’ve got a voice
for radio.” She turned and started walking up the stairs to get in line for the
metal detectors. “So I know what you’re wondering: Daisy, are you still dating
Mychal? Where’s your car? What happened to your hair? The answers are no,
sold, and a cut became necessary after Elena intentionally put three pieces of
chewed bubble gum in my hair while I was sleeping. It’s been a long two weeks,
Holmesy. Should I elaborate?”
I nodded.
“With pleasure,” she answered as we cleared the metal detectors. “So with
Mychal it really boiled down to my need to be young and wild and free—like, I
had this near-death experience and then thought, Do I really want to waste my
youth in a capital-R Relationship? And so I was, like, ‘Let’s see other people,’
and he was, like, ‘No,’ and I was, like, ‘Please,’ and he was, like, ‘I want to be in
a monogamous relationship,’ and I was, like, ‘I just don’t want the weight of
this, like, Thing dominating my life,’ and he was, like, ‘I’m not a thing,’ and then
we broke up. I think technically he dumped me in the end, but it was one of
those things where you’d need, like, a three-judge panel to determine who was
technically at fault.
“Anyway, then with the car, it turns out that cars are expensive to own and
also it turns out that they can hurt you, so I got a refund because I had it less than
sixty days, and now I’m just going to Uber everywhere for the rest of my life,
because then it’s kind of like I have every car, and also as a rich person I deserve
to be chauffeured. Should I keep going?”
We’d reached my locker now, and I was surprised to find that I remembered
the combination. There were so many human bodies around me. I kind of
couldn’t believe it. I pulled my locker open. I hadn’t done any homework. I was
behind on everything. The hallway was so loud, so crowded. “Yeah,” I said.
“No problem. I can do this all day. This is another reason we’re destined to
be together—you’re so good at not talking. So, with Elena, she put gum in my
hair on purpose while I was sleeping, and the next morning I was, like, ‘Why is
there chewed gum in my hair?’ and she was, like, ‘Ha-ha!’ I was, like, ‘Elena,
you have no understanding of humor. It isn’t funny just to make someone’s life
worse. Like, if I broke your leg, would that be funny?’ And she was, like, ‘Haha!’
So I got this fancy haircut, and believe you me, I paid for it out of Elena’s
college fund. My parents made me set up a college fund for Elena, BTW.
“In other news, the whole Mychal thing has made our lunch table a little
awkward, so we’re going to have a two-person picnic outside. I know it’s
slightly cold, but trust me, sitting next to Mychal in the cafeteria is far colder.
Are you so ready to go to biology right now and just absolutely murder it? Like,
in forty-seven minutes, the dead and bloodless carcass of honors biology will be
laid before your feet. God, a lot happened since you lost your mind. Is that rude
to say?”
“Actually, the problem is that I can’t lose my mind,” I said. “It’s
inescapable.”
“That is precisely how I feel about my virginity,” Daisy said. “Another
reason Mychal and I were doomed—he doesn’t want to have sex unless he’s in
love, and yes, I know that virginity is a misogynistic and oppressive social
construct, but I still want to lose it, and meanwhile I’ve got this boy hemming
and hawing like we’re in a Jane Austen novel. I wish boys didn’t have all these
feelings I have to manage like a fucking psychiatrist.” Daisy walked me to the
door of my classroom, opened it, and then walked me to my desk. I sat down.
“You know I love you, right?” I nodded. “My whole life I thought I was the star
of an overly earnest romance movie, and it turns out I was in a goddamned
buddy comedy all along. I gotta go to calc. Good to see you, Holmesy.”
—
Daisy had brought leftover pizza for our picnic, and we sat underneath our
school’s one big oak tree, halfway to the football field. It was frigid, and both of
us were bundled into our winter coats, hoods up, my jeans stiff on the frozen
ground.
I didn’t have gloves, so I tucked my fists into the coat. It was no weather for
a picnic.
“I’ve been thinking a lot about Pickett,” Daisy said.
“Yeah?”
“Yeah, just—while you were gone, I kept thinking about how weird it is to
leave your kids like that, without even saying good-bye. I almost feel bad for
him, to be honest. Like, what has to be wrong with him that he doesn’t at least
buy a burner phone somewhere and text his kids and tell them he’s okay?”
I felt worse for the thirteen-year-old who wakes up every morning thinking
that maybe today is the day. And then he plays video games every night to
distract from the dull ache of knowing your father doesn’t trust or love you
enough to be in contact, your father who privileged a tuatara over you in his
estate plans. “I feel worse for Noah than for Pickett,” I said.
“You’ve always empathized with that kid,” she said. “Even when you can’t
with your best friend.” I shot her a glance and she laughed it off, but I knew she
wasn’t kidding.
“So, what do your parents do?” I asked.
Daisy laughed again. “My dad works at the State Museum. He’s a security
guard there. He likes it, because he’s really into Indiana history, but mostly he
just makes sure nobody touches the mastodon bones or whatever. My mom
works at a dry cleaners in Broad Ripple.”
“Have you told them about the money yet?”
“Yeah. That’s how Elena got that college fund. They made me put ten grand
in it. My dad was, like, ‘Elena would do the same for you if she came into some
money.’ Like hell she would.”
“They weren’t mad?”
“That I came home one day with fifty thousand dollars? No, Holmesy, they
weren’t mad.”
Inside the arm of my coat, I could feel something seeping from my middle
fingertip. I’d have to change the Band-Aid before history, have to go through the
whole annoying ritual of it. But for now, I liked being next to Daisy. I liked
watching my warm breath in the cold.
“How’s Davis?” she asked.
“Haven’t talked to him,” I said. “I haven’t talked to anyone.”
“So it was pretty bad.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“I’m sorry.”
“Yeah, it’s not your fault.”
“Did you . . . do you think about killing yourself?”
“I thought about not wanting to be that way anymore.”
“Are you still . . .”
“I don’t know.” I let out a long, slow breath, and watched the steam of it
disappear in the winter air. “I think maybe I’m like the White River. Nonnavigable.”
“But that’s not the point of the story, Holmesy. The point of the story is they
built the city anyway, you know? You work with what you have. They had this
shit river, and they managed to build an okay city around it. Not a great city,
maybe. But not bad. You’re not the river. You’re the city.”
“So, I’m not bad?”
“Correct. You’re a solid B-plus. If you can build a B-plus city with C-minus
geography, that’s pretty great.”
I laughed. Beside me, Daisy lay down and motioned for me to lie next to her.
We were looking up, our heads near the trunk of that lone oak tree, the sky
smoke-gray above us past our fogged breath, the leafless branches intersecting
overhead.
I don’t know if I’d ever told Daisy about that—if she lay down at precisely
that moment because she knew how much I loved seeing the sky cut up. I
thought about how branches far from one another could still intersect in my line
of vision, like how the stars of Cassiopeia were far from one another, but
somehow near to me.
“I wish I understood it,” she said.
“It’s okay,” I said. “Nobody gets anybody else, not really. We’re all stuck
inside ourselves.”
“You just, like, hate yourself? You hate being yourself?”
“There’s no self to hate. It’s like, when I look into myself, there’s no actual
me—just a bunch of thoughts and behaviors and circumstances. And a lot of
them just don’t feel like they’re mine. They’re not things I want to think or do or
whatever. And when I look for the, like, Real Me, I never find it. It’s like those
nesting dolls, you know? The ones that are hollow, and then when you open
them up, there’s a smaller doll inside, and you keep opening hollow dolls until
eventually you get to the smallest one, and it’s solid all the way through. But
with me, I don’t think there is one that’s solid. They just keep getting smaller.”
“That reminds me of a story my mom tells,” Daisy said.
“What story?”
I could hear her teeth chattering when she talked but neither of us wanted to
stop looking up at the latticed sky. “Okay, so there’s this scientist, and he’s
giving a lecture to a huge audience about the history of the earth, and he explains
that the earth was formed billions of years ago from a cloud of cosmic dust, and
then for a while the earth was very hot, but then it cooled enough for oceans to
form. And single-celled life emerged in the oceans, and then over billions of
years, life got more abundant and complex, until two hundred fifty thousand or
so years ago, humans evolved, and we started using more advanced tools, and
then eventually built spaceships and everything.
“So he gives this whole presentation about the history of earth and life on it,
and then at the end, he asks if there are any questions. An old woman in the back
raises her hand, and says, ‘That’s all fine and good, Mr. Scientist, but the truth is,
the earth is a flat plane resting on the back of a giant turtle.’
“The scientist decides to have a bit of fun with the woman and responds,
‘Well, but if that’s so, what is the giant turtle standing upon?’
“And the woman says, ‘It is standing upon the shell of another giant turtle.’
“And now the scientist is frustrated, and he says, ‘Well, then what is that
turtle standing upon?’
“And the old woman says, ‘Sir, you don’t understand. It’s turtles all the way
down.’”
I laughed. “It’s turtles all the way down.”
“It’s turtles all the way fucking down, Holmesy. You’re trying to find the
turtle at the bottom of the pile, but that’s not how it works.”
“Because it’s turtles all the way down,” I said again, feeling something akin
to a spiritual revelation.
—
I stopped at Mom’s classroom for the last few minutes of lunch. I closed the door
behind me and sat down at a desk opposite her. I glanced up at the clock on the
wall. 1:08. I had six minutes. I didn’t want more.
“Hey,” I said.
“First day back going well?” She blew her nose into a Kleenex. She had a
cold, but she’d spent all her sick days on me being sick.
“Yeah,” I said. “So listen, Davis gave me some money. A lot of money.
About fifty thousand dollars. I haven’t spent it or anything. I’m saving it for
college.” Her face tightened. “It was a gift,” I said again.
“When?” she asked.
“Um, a couple months ago.”
“That’s not a gift. A necklace is a gift. Fifty thousand dollars is . . . not a gift.
If I were you, I’d return that money to Davis,” she said. “You don’t want to feel
indebted to him.”
“But I’m not you,” I said. “And I don’t.”
After a second, she said, “That’s true. You’re not.” I waited for her to say
something more, to tell me why I was wrong to keep the money.
At last, she said, “Your life is yours, Aza, but I think if you look at your
mental health the last couple months . . .”
“The money didn’t cause that. I’ve been sick for a long time.”
“Not like this. I need you to be well, Aza. I can’t lose—”
“God, Mom, please stop saying that. I know you’re not trying to make me
feel pressure, but it feels like I’m hurting you, like I’m committing assault or
something, and it makes me feel ten thousand times worse. I’m doing my best,
but I can’t stay sane for you, okay?”
After a minute she said, “The day you came home after the accident, I
carried you to the bathroom, and I carried you back to bed and tucked the covers
up to your chin, and I realized that I’ll probably never pick you up again. You’re
right. I keep saying I can’t lose you, but I will. I am. And that’s a hard thought.
That’s a hard, hard thought. But you’re right. You’re not me. You make your
own choices. And if you’re saving it for your education, making responsible
decisions, well, then, I’m—” She never finished the sentence, because the bell
beeped from on high.
“Okay,” I said.
“Love you, Aza.”
“I love you, too, Mom.” I wanted to say more, to find a way to express the
magnetic poles of my love for my mother: thank you I’m sorry thank you I’m
sorry. But I couldn’t bring myself to, and anyway, the bell had rung.
—
Before I could get to history, Mychal intercepted me. “Hey, how’s it going?” he
asked.
“I’m okay, you?”
“Daisy and I broke up.”
“I heard.”
“I’m kinda devastated.”
“Sorry.”
“And she isn’t even upset about it, which just makes me feel pathetic. She
thinks I should get over it, but everything reminds me of her, Holmesy, and
seeing her ignore me, not show up to lunch, all that—can you, um, talk to her for
me?” Right then, I spotted Daisy halfway down the crowded hallway, her head
down. “Daisy!” I shouted. She kept walking, so I yelled again, louder. She
looked up and picked her way toward us through the crowd.
I pulled her and Mychal together. “Both of you can talk to me about each
other, but you can’t talk to each other about each other. And you’re going to fix
that, because it’s annoying. Cool? Cool. I have to go to history.”
Daisy texted me during class. Thanks for that. We’ve decided to just be
friends.
Me: Cool.
Her: But the kind of friends who kiss right after deciding to just be
friends.
Me: I’m sure this will work out perfectly.
Her: Everything always does.
Since I had my phone out, and we were watching a video in class anyway, I
decided to text Davis. Sorry not to reply for so long. Hi. I miss you.
He wrote back immediately. When can I see you?
Me: Tomorrow?
Him: Seven at Applebee’s?
Me: Sounds good.
TWENTY-TWO
I THOUGHT I’D BE FINE driving Mom’s silver Toyota Camry to Applebee’s that
night, but I couldn’t shake memories of the accident. It seemed surreal and
miraculous to me that so many cars could drive past one another without
colliding, and I felt certain that each set of headlights headed my way would
inevitably veer into my path. Remembered the crunching sound of Harold’s
death, the silence that followed, the agony in my ribs. Thought about the biggest
part being the part that hurts, about my dad’s phone, gone forever. Tried to let
myself have the thoughts, because to deny them was to just let them take over. It
sort of worked—like everything else.
I made it to Applebee’s fifteen minutes early. Davis was already there, and
he hugged me in the entryway before we got seated. A thought appeared in my
mind undeniable as the sun in a clear sky: He’s going to want to put his bacteria
in your mouth.
“Hi,” I said.
“I missed you,” he said.
After the nervous-making car trip, my brain was revving up. I told myself
that having a thought was not dangerous, that thoughts aren’t actions, that
thoughts are just thoughts.
Dr. Karen Singh liked to say that an unwanted thought was like a car driving
past you when you’re standing on the side of the road, and I told myself I didn’t
have to get into that car, that my moment of choice was not whether to have the
thought, but whether to be carried away by it.
And then I got in the car.
I sat down in the booth and instead of sitting across from me, he sat next to
me, his hip against mine. “I talked to your mom a few times,” he said. “I think
she’s coming around to me.”
Who cares if he wants his bacteria in my mouth? Kissing is nice. Kissing
feels good. I want to kiss him. But you don’t want to get campylobacter. I won’t.
You’ll be sick for weeks. Might have to take antibiotics. Stop. Then you’ll get C.
diff. Or you’ll get Epstein-Barr from the campylobacter. Stop. That could
paralyze you, all because you kissed him when you didn’t even actually want to
because it’s fucking gross, inserting your tongue into someone else’s mouth. “Are
you there?” he asked.
“What, yeah,” I said.
“I asked how you’re feeling.”
“Good,” I said. “Honestly not good right now, but good in general.”
“Why not good right now?”
“Can you sit across from me?”
“Um, yeah, of course.” He got up and moved around to the opposite bench,
which made me feel better. For a moment, anyway.
“I can’t do this,” I said.
“Can’t do what?”
“This,” I said. “I can’t, Davis. I don’t know if I’ll ever be able to. Like, I
know you’re waiting for me to get better, and I really appreciate all your texts
and everything. It’s . . . it’s incredibly sweet, but, like, this is probably what
better looks like for me.”
“I like this you.”
“No, you don’t. You want to make out and sit on the same side of the table
and do other normal couple things. Because of course you do.”
He didn’t say anything for a minute. “Maybe you just don’t find me
attractive?”
“It’s not that,” I said.
“But maybe it is.”
“It’s not. It’s not that I don’t want to kiss you or that I don’t like kissing or
whatever. I . . . my brain says that kissing is one of a bunch of things that will,
like, kill me. Like, actually kill me. But it’s not even about dying, really—like, if
I knew I was dying, and I kissed you good-bye, literally my last thought
wouldn’t be about the fact that I was dying; it would be about the eighty million
microbes that we’d just exchanged. I know that when you just touched me, it
didn’t give me a disease, or it probably didn’t. God, I can’t even say that it
definitely didn’t because I’m so fucking scared of it. I can’t even call it anything
but it, you know? I just can’t.”
I could tell I was hurting him. I could see it in the way he kept blinking. I
could see that he didn’t understand it, that he couldn’t. I didn’t blame him. It
made no sense. I was a story riddled with plot holes.
“That sounds really scary,” he said. I just nodded. “Do you feel like you’re
getting better?” Everyone wanted me to feed them that story—darkness to light,
weakness to strength, broken to whole. I wanted it, too.
“Maybe,” I said. “Honestly, I feel really fragile. I feel like I’ve been taped
back together.”
“I know that feeling.”
“How are you?” I asked.
He shrugged.
“How’s Noah?” I asked.
“Not good.”
“Um, unpack that for me,” I said.
“He just misses Dad. It’s like Noah’s two people, almost: There’s the
miniature dudebro who drinks bad vodka and is the king of his little gang of
eighth-grade pseudo-badasses. And then the kid who crawls into bed with me
some nights and cries. It’s almost like Noah thinks if he screws up enough, Dad
will be forced to come out of hiding.”
“He’s heartbroken,” I said.
“Yeah, well. Aren’t we all. It’s . . . I don’t really want to talk about my life, if
that’s okay.” It occurred to me that Davis probably liked what infuriated Daisy—
that I didn’t ask too many questions. Everyone else was so relentlessly curious
about the life of the billionaire boy, but I’d always been too stuck inside myself
to interrogate him.
Slowly, the conversation sputtered. We started talking to each other like
people who used to be close—catching each other up on our lives rather than
living them together. By the time he paid the bill, I knew that whatever we’d
been, we weren’t anymore.
Still, once I was home and under the covers, I texted him. You around?
You can’t do it the other way, he replied. And I can’t do it this way.
Me: Why?
Him: It makes me feel like you only like me at a distance. I need to be
liked close up.
I kept typing and deleting, typing and deleting. I never ended up replying.
—
The next day at school, I was walking across the cafeteria to our lunch table
when I was intercepted by Daisy. “Holmesy, we have to talk privately.” She sat
me down at a mostly empty lunch table, a few seats away from some freshmen.
“Did you break up with Mychal again?”
“No, of course not. The magic of being Just Friends is that you can’t break
up. I feel like I’ve unlocked the secret of the universe with this Just Friends
thing. But no, we’re going on an adventure.”
“We are?”
“Do you feel like you’ve recovered your wits enough that you could, for
instance, sneak underneath the city of Indianapolis to attend a guerrilla art
show?”
“A what?”
“Okay, so remember how I had that idea for Mychal to make those
photographic montages of exonerated prisoners?”
“Well, it was mostly his i—”
“Let’s not get lost in the details, Holmesy. The point is he made it and
submitted it to this supercool arts collective Known City, and they are putting it
in this one-night-only gallery show they’re doing Friday night called
Underground Art, where they turn part of the Pogue’s Run tunnel into an art
gallery.” Pogue’s Run was the tunnel that emptied into the White River that
Pickett’s company had been hired to expand, the work they’d never finished.
Seemed an odd place for an art show.
“I don’t really want to spend Friday night at an illegal art gallery.”
“It’s not illegal. They have permission. It’s just super underground. Like,
literally underground.” I scrunched up my face. “It’s like the coolest thing ever
to happen in Indianapolis, and my Just Friend has art in the show. Obviously
don’t feel obligated to be there, but . . . do be there.”
“I don’t want to be a third wheel.”
“I am going to be nervous and surrounded by people cooler than me and I’d
really like my best friend to be there.”
I opened the Ziploc bag containing my peanut butter and honey sandwich
and took a bite.
“You’re thinking about it,” she said, excitement in her voice.
“I’m thinking about it,” I allowed.
And then, after I swallowed, I said, “All right, let’s do it.”
“Yes! Yes! We will pick you up at six fifteen on Friday; it’s going to be
amazing.”
The way she smiled at me made it impossible not to smile back. In a quiet
voice, not even sure she could hear me, I said, “I love you, Daisy. I know you
say that to me all the time and I never say it, but I do. I love you.”
“Ahh, fuck. Don’t go all soft on me, Holmesy.”
—
Mychal and Daisy showed up at my doorstep at six fifteen sharp. She was
wearing a dress-and-tights combo dwarfed by her huge puffer coat, and Mychal
was wearing a silver-gray suit that was slightly too big for him. I had on a longsleeve
T-shirt, jeans, and a coat. “I didn’t know I was supposed to dress up for
the sewer,” I said sheepishly.
“The art sewer.” Daisy smiled. I wondered whether maybe I should change,
but she just grabbed me and said, “Holmesy, you look radiant. You look like . . .
like yourself.”
I sat in one of the backseats in Mychal’s minivan, and as he drove south on
Michigan Road, Daisy started playing one of our favorite songs, “You’re the
One.” Mychal was laughing as Daisy and I screamed the lyrics to each other. She
sang lead, and I belted out the background voice that just repeated, “You’re
everything everything everything,” and I felt like I was. You’re both the fire and
the water that extinguishes it. You’re the narrator, the protagonist, and the
sidekick. You’re the storyteller and the story told. You are somebody’s
something, but you are also your you.
As Daisy switched the song to a romantic ballad that she and Mychal were
singing, I started thinking about turtles all the way down. I was thinking that
maybe the old lady and the scientist were both right. Like, the world is billions
of years old, and life is a product of nucleotide mutation and everything. But the
world is also the stories we tell about it.
—
Mychal turned off Michigan at Tenth Street, and we drove for a while until we
reached a pool supply store with a flickering backlit sign saying ROSENTHAL
POOLS. The parking lot was already half full. Daisy stopped the music as Mychal
pulled into a spot. We got out and found ourselves surrounded by a weird mix of
twenty-something hipsters and middle-aged couples. Everyone but us seemed to
know one another, and the three of us stood next to Mychal’s car for a long time
in silence, just watching the scene, until a middle-aged woman in an all-black
outfit walked over and said, “Are you here for the event?”
“I’m, um, Mychal Turner,” Mychal said. “I have a, um, a picture in the
show.”
“Prisoner 101?”
“Yeah. That’s me.”
“I’m Frances Oliver. I think Prisoner 101 is one of the strongest pieces in the
gallery. And I’m the curator, so I should know. Come, come, let’s head on down
together. I would be fascinated to learn more about your process.”
Frances and Mychal began walking across the parking lot, but every few
seconds Frances would pause and say, “Oh, I must introduce you to . . .” and
we’d stop for a while to meet an artist or a collector or a “funding partner.”
Slowly, he was swallowed by all the people who loved Prisoner 101 and wanted
to talk with him about it, and after we stood behind him for a while, Daisy
finally grabbed him by the hand and said, “We’re gonna head down to the show.
Enjoy this. I’m so proud of you.”
“I can come with,” he said, turning away from a gaggle of art students from
Herron, the art college in town.
“No, have fun. You gotta meet all these people, so they’ll buy your pictures.”
He smiled, kissed her, and returned to his crowd of fans.
When Daisy and I reached the edge of the parking lot, we saw through the
trees a flashlight waving back and forth in the air, so we wound our way down a
little hill toward the light until the brush opened up into a wide concrete basin. A
tiny stream of water—I could easily step over it—bubbled along its bottom. We
walked toward the bearded man waving the flashlight, who introduced himself
as Kip and handed us hard hats with lanterns and a flashlight. “Follow the tunnel
in for two hundred yards, then take your first left, and you’ll be in the gallery.”
The light from my helmet followed the creek downstream. In the distance, I
could see the start of the tunnel, a light-sucking square cut into a hillside. There
was an overturned shopping cart just outside the start of the culvert, trapped
against a moss-covered boulder. As we walked toward the tunnel’s entrance, I
looked up at the black silhouettes of leafless maple trees splitting up the sky.
The creek ran along the left side of the Pogue’s Run tunnel; we walked on a
slightly elevated concrete sidewalk to the right of the creek. The smell enveloped
us immediately—sewage and the sickly sweet smell of rot. I thought my nose
would get used to it, but it never did.
A few steps in, we began to hear rodents scurrying along the creek bed. We
could hear voices, too—echoey, unintelligible conversations that seemed to be
coming from all sides of us. Our headlamps lit up the graffiti that lined the walls
—spray-painted tags in bubble letters, but also stenciled images and messages.
Daisy’s light lingered on one image featuring a portly rat drinking a bottle of
wine with the caption, THE RAT KING KNOWS YOUR SECRETS. Another message,
scrawled in what looked like white house paint, read, IT’S NOT HOW YOU DIE. IT’S
WHO YOU DIE.
“This is a little creepy,” Daisy whispered.
“Why are you whispering?”
“Scared,” she whispered. “Has it been two hundred yards yet?”
“Dunno,” I said. “But I hear people up there.” I turned around and shone my
light back toward the tunnel’s entrance, and a couple of middle-aged men behind
us waved. “See, it’s fine.”
The creek wasn’t really a body of water anymore so much as a slow-moving
puddle; I watched a rat scamper across it without ever getting its nose wet. “That
was a rat,” Daisy said, her voice clenched.
“It lives here,” I said. “We’re the invaders.” We kept walking. The only light
in the world seemed to be the yellow beams of headlamps and flashlights—it
was almost like everyone down there had become beams of light, bouncing
along the tunnel in little groups.
—
Ahead of us, I saw headlamps turning to the left, into a square side tunnel, about
eight feet high. We jumped over the trickling creek, past a sign that read, A
PICKETT ENGINEERING PROJECT, and into the concrete side tunnel.
You could only see the artwork by the light of headlamps and flashlights, so
the paintings and photographs lining the walls seemed to come in and out of
focus. To see all of Mychal’s picture, you had to stand against the opposite wall
of the tunnel. It really was an amazing artwork—Prisoner 101 looked as real as
anyone, but he was made from pieces of the one hundred mugshots Mychal had
found of men convicted of murder and then exonerated. Even up close, I
couldn’t tell that Prisoner 101 wasn’t real.
The rest of the art was cool, too—big abstract paintings of hard-edged
geometric shapes, an assemblage of old wooden chairs precariously stacked to
the ceiling, a huge photograph of a kid jumping on a trampoline alone in a vast
harvested cornfield—but Mychal’s was my favorite, and not just because I knew
him. After a while, we heard a clamor of voices approach, and the gallery became
crowded. Someone had set up a stereo, and music began reverberating through
the tunnel. Plastic cups were passed around, and then bottles of wine, and the
place got louder and louder, and even though it was freezing down there, I
started to feel sweaty, so I asked Daisy if she wanted to go for a walk.
“A walk?”
“Yeah, just, I don’t know, down the tunnel or something.”
“You want to go for a walk down the tunnel.”
“Yeah. I mean, we don’t have to.”
She pointed into the darkness beyond the reach of our headlamps. “You’re
proposing that we just walk into that void.”
“Not for like a mile or anything. Just to see what there is to see.”
Daisy sighed. “Yeah, okay. Let’s go for a walk.”
—
It only took a minute for the air to feel crisper. The tunnel ahead of us was pitchblack,
and it curved in a long, slow arc away from the party until we couldn’t see
the light from it anymore. We could still hear the music and the people talking
over it, but it felt distant, like a party you drive past.
“I don’t understand how you can be so inhumanly calm down here, fifteen
feet below downtown Indianapolis, ankle deep in rat shit, but you have a panic
attack when you think your finger is infected.”
“I don’t know,” I said. “This just isn’t scary.”
“It objectively is,” she said.
I reached up and clicked off my headlamp. “Turn off your light,” I said.
“Hell, no.”
“Turn it off. Nothing bad will happen.” She clicked off her light, and the
world went dark. I felt my eyes trying to adjust, but there was no light to adjust
to. “Now you can’t see the walls, right? Can’t see the rats. Spin around a few
times and you won’t know which way is in and which way is out. This is scary.
Now imagine if we couldn’t talk, if we couldn’t hear each other’s breathing.
Imagine if we had no sense of touch, so even if we were standing next to each
other, we’d never know it.
“Imagine you’re trying to find someone, or even you’re trying to find
yourself, but you have no senses, no way to know where the walls are, which
way is forward or backward, what is water and what is air. You’re senseless and
shapeless—you feel like you can only describe what you are by identifying what
you’re not, and you’re floating around in a body with no control. You don’t get
to decide who you like or where you live or when you eat or what you fear.
You’re just stuck in there, totally alone, in this darkness. That’s scary. This,” I
said, and turned on the flashlight. “This is control. This is power. There may be
rats and spiders and whatever the hell. But we shine the light on them, not the
other way around. We know where the walls are, which way is in and which way
is out. This,” I said, turning off my light again, “is what I feel like when I’m
scared. This”—I turned the flashlight back on—“is a walk in the fucking park.”
We walked for a while in silence. “It’s that bad?” she asked finally.
“Sometimes,” I said.
“But then your flashlight starts working again,” she said.
“So far.”
—
As we kept walking, through the tunnel, the music behind us growing fainter,
Daisy calmed down a bit. “I’m thinking of killing off Ayala,” she said. “Would
you take that personally?”
“Nah,” I said. “I was just starting to like her, though.”
“Did you read the most recent one?”
“The one where they go to Ryloth to deliver power converters? I loved the
scene where Rey and Ayala are waiting for that dude in a bar, and they’re just
talking. I like your action scenes and everything, but the just talking is my
favorite. Also, I liked that I got to hook up with a Twi’lek. Or, Ayala did, I guess.
Your writing makes me feel like it’s real, like I’m really there.”
“Thanks,” she said. “Now you’re making me think maybe I shouldn’t kill
her.”
“I don’t mind if you kill her. Just make her die a hero.”
“Oh, of course. She has to. I was thinking I’d make it some Rogue One–style
sacrifice for the common good. If that sounds okay?”
“Works for me,” I told her.
“God, is the smell getting worse?” she asked.
“It’s not getting better,” I acknowledged. It smelled more like rotting garbage
and unflushed toilets, and as we passed an offshoot to the tunnel, Daisy said she
wanted to turn around, but in the distance ahead of us I could see a pinprick of
gray light, and I wanted to see what was at the end.
As we walked, the sounds of the city grew slowly louder and the smell
improved because we were close to open air. The gray light grew larger until we
reached the edge of the tunnel. It was open and unfinished—the tiny trickle of
water that was supposed to be diverted from the White River was instead
dripping down into it, two stories below us.
I looked up. It was past ten o’clock, but I’d never seen the city look so
blindingly bright. I could see everything: the green moss on the boulders in the
river below; the golden frothy bubbles at the base of the waterfall; the trees in
the distance bent over the water like the roof of a chapel; the power lines sagging
across the river below us; a great silver grain mill absurdly still in the moonlight;
neon Speedway and Chase Bank signs in the distance.
Indianapolis is so flat you can never really look down on it; it’s not a town
with million-dollar views. But now I had one, in the most unexpected place, the
city stretching out below and beyond me, and it took a minute before I
remembered that this was nighttime, that this silver-lit landscape is what passed,
aboveground, for darkness.
Daisy surprised me by sitting down, her legs dangling over the concrete
edge. I sat down on the other side of the trickle of water, and we looked at the
same scene together for a long time.
We went out to the meadow that night, talking about college and kissing and
religion and art, and I didn’t feel like I was watching a movie of our
conversation. I was having it. I could listen to her, and I knew she was listening
to me.
“I wonder if they’ll ever finish this thing,” Daisy said at one point.
“I kind of hope not,” I said. “I mean, I’m all for clean water, but I kind of
want to be able to come here again in like ten or twenty years or something.
Like, instead of going to my high school reunion, I want to be here.” With you, I
wanted to say.
“Yeah,” she said. “Keep Pogue’s Run filthy, because the view from the
unfinished water treatment tunnel is spectacular. Thanks, Russell Pickett, for
your corruption and incompetence.”
“Pogue’s Run,” I mumbled. “Wait, where does Pogue’s Run start? Where is
its mouth?”
“The mouth of a river is where it ends, not where it begins. This is the
mouth.” I watched her realize it. “Pogue’s Run. Holy shit, Holmesy. We’re in the
jogger’s mouth.”
I stood up. I felt for some reason like Pickett might be right behind us, like
he might push us off the edge of his tunnel and into the river below. “Now I’m a
little freaked out,” I said.
“What are we gonna do?”
“Nothing,” I said. “Nothing. We’re gonna turn around, walk back to the
party, hang out with fancy art people, and get home by curfew.” I started walking
back toward the distant music. “I’ll tell Davis, so he knows. We let him decide
whether to tell Noah. Other than that, we don’t say a word.”
“All right,” she said, hustling to catch up to me. “I mean, is he down here
right now?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “I don’t think it’s for us to know.”
“Right,” she said. “How could he have been down here this whole time,
though?” I had a guess, but didn’t say anything. “God, that smell . . .” she said,
her voice trailing off as she said it.
—
You’d think solving mysteries would bring you closure, that closing the loop
would comfort and quiet your mind. But it never does. The truth always
disappoints. As we circulated around the gallery, looking for Mychal, I didn’t
feel like I’d found the solid nesting doll or anything. Nothing had been fixed, not
really. It was like the zoologist said about science: You never really find
answers, just new and deeper questions.
We finally found Mychal leaning against the wall opposite his photograph,
talking to two older women. Daisy cut in and took his hand. “I hate to break up
this party,” she said, “but this famous artist has a curfew.”
Mychal laughed, and the three of us made our way out of the tunnel, into the
silver-bright parking lot, and then into Mychal’s minivan. The moment my door
slid shut, he said, “That was the best night of my life thank you for being there
oh my God that was just the best thing that’s ever happened to me I feel like I
might be an artist, like a proper one. That was so, so amazing. Did you guys
have fun?”
“Tell us all about it,” Daisy said, not exactly answering his question.
—
When I got home, Mom was sitting at the kitchen table, drinking a mug of tea.
“What is that smell?” she asked.
“Sewage, body odor, mold—a mix of things.”
“I’m worried, Aza. I’m worried you’re losing your connection to reality.”
“I’m not,” I said. “I’m just tired.”
“Tonight, you’re gonna stay up and talk to me.”
“About what?”
“About where you were, what you were doing, who you were doing it with.
About your life.”
So I told her. I told her that Daisy and Mychal and I had attended a one-night
art show beneath downtown, and that Daisy and I had walked to the end of
Pickett’s unfinished tunnel, and I told her about going out to the meadow, and I
told her about the jogger’s mouth, about thinking Pickett was maybe down there,
about the stench.
“You’re going to tell Davis?” she asked.
“Yeah.”
“But not the police?”
“No,” I said. “If I tell the police, and he is dead down there, Davis and
Noah’s house won’t even be theirs anymore. It’ll be owned by a tuatara.”
“A tua-what-a?”
“A tuatara. It looks like a lizard, but it isn’t a lizard. Descended from the
dinosaurs. They live for like a hundred and fifty years, and Pickett’s will leaves
everything to his pet tuatara. The house, the business, everything.”
“The madness of wealth,” my mother mumbled. “Sometimes you think
you’re spending money, but all along the money’s spending you.” She glanced
down at her cup of tea, and then back up to me. “But only if you worship it. You
serve whatever you worship.”
“So we gotta be careful what we worship,” I said. She smiled, then shooed
me off to the shower. As I stood underneath the water, I wondered what I’d
worship as I got older, and how that would end up bending the arc of my life this
way or that. I was still at the beginning. I could still be anybody.
TWENTY-THREE
I WOKE UP THE NEXT MORNING, a Saturday, feeling truly rested, frozen rain
plinking against my bedroom window. Indianapolis winters rarely feature the
sort of beautiful snow that you can ski and sled in; our usual winter precipitation
is a conglomeration called “wintry mix,” involving ice pellets, frozen rain, and
wind.
It wasn’t even that cold—maybe thirty-five—but the wind was howling
outside. I got up, dressed, ate some cereal, took a pill, and watched a bit of TV
with Mom. I spent the morning procrastinating—I’d pull out my phone, start to
text him, and then put it away. Then pull it out again, but no. Not yet. It never
seemed like the right time. But of course, it never is the right time.
—
I remember after my dad died, for a while, it was both true and not true in my
mind. For weeks, really, I could conjure him into being. I’d imagine him walking
in, soaked in sweat, having finished mowing the lawn, and he’d try to hug me
but I’d squirm out from his arms because even then sweat freaked me out.
Or I’d be in my room, lying on my stomach, reading a book, and I’d look
over at the closed door and imagine him opening it, and then he would be in the
room with me, and I’d be looking up at him as he knelt down to kiss the top of
my head.
And then it became harder to summon him, to smell his smell, to feel him
lifting me up. My father died suddenly, but also across the years. He was still
dying, really—which meant I guess that he was still living, too.
People always talk like there’s a bright line between imagination and
memory, but there isn’t, at least not for me. I remember what I’ve imagined and
imagine what I remember.
—
I finally texted Davis just after noon: We need to talk. Can you come over to my
house today?
He replied, Nobody’s here to look after Noah. Can you come over here?
I need to talk to you alone, I wrote. I wanted Davis to have the choice
whether or not to tell his brother.
I can be there at five thirty.
Thanks. See you then.
—
The day moved agonizingly slowly. I tried reading, texting Daisy, and watching
TV, but nothing would make the time speed up. I wasn’t sure whether life would
be better frozen in this moment, or on the other side of the moment that was
coming.
By four forty-five, I was reading in the living room while Mom paid bills.
“Davis is coming over in a little bit,” I told her.
“Okay. I’ve got a couple errands to run. You need anything at the grocery
store?”
I shook my head.
“You feeling anxious?”
“Is there any way we can make a deal where I tell you when I have a mental
health concern instead of you asking?”
“It’s impossible for me not to worry, baby.”
“I know, but it’s also impossible not to feel the weight of that worry like a
boulder on my chest.”
“I’ll try.”
“Thanks, Mom. I love you.”
“I love you, too. So much.”
—
I scrolled through my endless TV options, none of them particularly compelling,
until I heard Davis’s knock—soft and unsteady—on the door.
“Hey,” I said, and hugged him.
“Hey,” he said. I motioned to the couch for him to sit down. “How’ve you
been?”
“Listen,” I said. “Davis, your dad. I know where the jogger’s mouth is. It’s
the mouth of Pogue’s Run, where the company had that unfinished project.”
He winced, then nodded. “You’re sure?”
“Pretty sure,” I said. “I think he might be down there. Daisy and I were there
last night, and . . .”
“Did you see him?”
I shook my head. “No. But the run’s mouth, the jogger’s mouth. It makes
sense.”
“It’s just a note from his phone, though. You think he’s just been down there
this whole time? Hiding in a sewer?”
“Maybe,” I said. “But . . . well, I don’t know.”
“But?”
“I don’t want to worry you, but there was a bad smell. A really bad smell
down there.”
“That could’ve been anything,” he said. But I could see the fear on his face.
“I know, yeah, totally, it could be anything.”
“I never thought . . . I never let myself think—” And then his voice caught.
The cry that finally came out of him felt like the sky ripping open. He sort of fell
into me, and I held him on the couch. Felt his rib cage heave. It wasn’t only
Noah who missed his father. “Oh God, he’s dead, isn’t he?”
“You don’t know that,” I said. But he kind of did. There was a reason there
had been no trail and no communication: He’d been gone all along.
He lay down and I lay down with him, the two of us barely fitting on the
musty couch. He kept saying what do I do, what do I do, his head on my
shoulder. I wondered whether it was a mistake to tell him. What do I do? He
asked it again and again, pleading.
“You keep going,” I told him. “You’ve got seven years. No matter what
actually happened, he’ll be legally alive for seven years, and you’ll have the
house and everything. That’s a long time to build a new life, Davis. Seven years
ago, you and I hadn’t even met, you know?”
“We’ve got nobody now,” he mumbled. I wished I could tell him that he had
me, that he could count on me, but he couldn’t.
“You have your brother,” I said.
That made him split open again, and we cuddled together for a long time,
until Mom came home with the groceries. Davis and I both jumped to a seating
position, even though we hadn’t been doing anything.
“Sorry to interrupt,” Mom said.
“I was just headed out,” Davis said.
“You don’t have to,” Mom and I said simultaneously.
“I kinda do,” he said. He leaned over and hugged me with one arm. “Thank
you,” he whispered, although I wasn’t sure I’d done him any favors.
Davis stopped at the doorway for a second, looked back at Mom and me in
what must have seemed to him like domestic bliss. I thought he might say
something, but he just waved, shyly and awkwardly, and disappeared out the
front door.
—
It was a quiet night in the Holmes household. Could’ve been any night, really. I
worked on a paper about the Civil War for history class. Outside, the day—
which had never been particularly bright—dissolved into darkness. I told Mom I
was going to sleep, changed into pajamas, brushed my teeth, changed the Band-
Aid over the scab on my fingertip, crawled into bed, and texted Davis. Hi.
When he didn’t reply, I wrote Daisy. Talked to Davis.
Her: How’d it go?
Me: Not great.
Her: Want me to come over?
Me: Yeah.
Her: On my way.
—
An hour later, Daisy and I were lying next to each other on my bed, computers
on our stomachs. I was reading the new Ayala story. Every time I giggled at
something, she’d say, “What’s funny?” and I’d tell her. After I finished it, we
just lay there, in bed together, staring up at the ceiling.
“Well,” Daisy said after a while, “it all worked out in the end.”
“How’s that?”
“Our heroes got rich and nobody got hurt.”
“Everyone got hurt,” I pointed out.
“What I mean is that no one got injured.”
“I lacerated my liver!”
“Oh, right. I forgot about that. At least no one died.”
“Harold died! And possibly Pickett!”
“Holmesy, I am trying to have a happy ending here. Stop screwing it up for
me.”
“I’m so Ayala,” I answered.
“So Ayala.”
“The problem with happy endings,” I said, “is that they’re either not really
happy, or not really endings, you know? In real life, some things get better and
some things get worse. And then eventually you die.”
Daisy laughed. “As always, Aza ‘And Then Eventually You Die’ Holmes is
here to remind you of how the story really ends, with the extinction of our
species.”
I laughed. “Well, that is the only real ending, though.”
“No, it’s not, Holmesy. You pick your endings, and your beginnings. You get
to pick the frame, you know? Maybe you don’t choose what’s in the picture, but
you decide on the frame.”
—
Davis never wrote me back, not even after I texted him a few days later. But he
did update his blog.
“And, like the baseless fabric of this vision, / The cloud-capp’d towers,
the gorgeous palaces, / The solemn temples, the great globe itself, / Yea,
all which it inherit, shall dissolve / And, like this insubstantial pageant
faded, / Leave not a rack behind.”
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE
I get that nothing lasts. But why do I have to miss everybody so much?
TWENTY-FOUR
A MONTH LATER, just after Christmas vacation ended, I got up early and poured a
couple bowls of cereal for Mom and me. I was eating in front of the TV when
she walked in, still wearing pajamas, flustered. “Late late late,” she said. “Hit
snooze too many times.”
“I made you breakfast,” I told her, and when she joined me on the couch, she
said, “Cheerios aren’t something you make.” I laughed as she took a few bites,
then ran off to get dressed. Always a flurry of movement, my mother.
When I turned back to the TV, a red breaking news band was scrolling across
the bottom of the screen. I saw a reporter standing in front of the gates of the
Pickett compound. I fumbled for the remote and unmuted the TV.
“Our sources indicate that while Pickett has not been positively identified,
authorities believe the body found in an offshoot of the Pogue’s Run tunnel is
indeed that of billionaire construction magnate Russell Davis Pickett, Sr. One
source close to the investigation told Eyewitness News that Pickett likely died of
exposure within quote ‘a few days’ of his disappearance, and while we have no
official confirmation, several sources tell us that Pickett’s body was discovered
by police after an anonymous tip.”
I texted Davis immediately. Just saw the news. I’m so sorry, Davis. I know
I’ve said that to you a lot, but I am. I’m just so sorry.
He didn’t reply right away, so I added, I want you to know it wasn’t Daisy or
me who tipped off the cops. We never said anything to anyone.
Now I saw the . . . of his typing. I know. It was us. Noah and I decided
together.
Mom came in, putting earrings in while slipping on her shoes. She must’ve
overheard the last bit of the story, because she said, “Aza, you should reach out
to Davis. This is going to be a very hard day for him.”
“I was just texting him,” I said. “They were the ones who told the cops
where to look.”
“Can you imagine, that whole estate is going to a lizard?” They could’ve
waited seven years, at least, before Pickett was declared dead—seven more years
of that house, seven more years of getting anything they wanted—but they’d
decided to let it go to a tuatara.
“I guess they couldn’t leave their dad down there,” I said. “Maybe I
shouldn’t have told him about the jogger’s mouth.” This was, after all, my fault.
An icy dread passed over me. I’d forced them to choose between abandoning
their father and abandoning their lives.
“Be kind to yourself,” Mom said. “Obviously knowing the truth mattered
more to him than the house, and it’s not like he’ll be thrown out onto the streets,
Aza.”
I tried to listen to her, but the undeniable feeling had sprung up in me. For a
moment I tried to resist, but only a moment. I slipped off the Band-Aid and dug
my nail into the callus of my finger, opening up a cut where the previous one had
finally healed.
As I washed and rebandaged it in the bathroom, I stared at myself. I would
always be like this, always have this within me. There was no beating it. I would
never slay the dragon, because the dragon was also me. My self and the disease
were knotted together for life.
I was thinking about Davis’s journal, of that Frost quote, “In three words I
can sum up everything I’ve learned about life—it goes on.”
And you go on, too, when the current is with you and when it isn’t. Or at
least that’s what I whispered wordlessly to myself. Before I left the bathroom, I
texted him again. Can we hang out sometime?
I saw the . . . appear, but he never replied.
“We should get going,” Mom said. I opened the bathroom door, pulled a
jacket and a knit hat from the coatrack, and entered our frigid garage. I shimmied
my fingertips under the garage door, lifted it up, and sat down in the passenger
seat while Mom finished making her morning coffee. I kept looking at my
phone, waiting for his reply. I was cold but sweating, the sweat soaking into my
ski hat. I thought of Davis, hearing his own name on the news again. You go on, I
told myself, and tried through the ether to say it to him, too.
—
Over the next few months, I kept going. I got better without ever quite getting
well. Daisy and I started a Mental Health Alliance and a Fan-Fiction Workshop
so that we could list some proper extracurriculars on next year’s college
applications, even though we were the only two members of both clubs. We
hung out most nights, at her apartment or at Applebee’s or at my house,
sometimes with Mychal but usually not—usually it was just the two of us,
watching movies or doing homework or just talking. It was so easy to go out into
the meadow with her.
I missed Davis, of course. The first few days, I kept checking my phone,
waiting for him to reply, but slowly I understood that we were going to be part of
each other’s past. I still missed him, though. I missed my dad, too. And Harold. I
missed everybody. To be alive is to be missing.
—
And then one night in April, Daisy and I were over at my house, watching the
one-night-only reunion of our favorite band, who were performing at some thirdtier
music awards show. They’d just brilliantly lip-synced their way through “It’s
Gotta Be You,” when someone knocked. It was almost eleven o’clock, too late
for visitors, and I felt a shiver of nerves as I opened the door.
It was Davis, wearing a plaid button-down and skinny jeans. He was holding
a huge box.
“Um, hi,” I said.
“This is for you,” he told me, and handed me the box, which wasn’t as heavy
as I expected. I carried it inside and placed it on our dining room table, and when
I turned back, he was already walking away.
“Wait,” I said. “Come here.” I reached my hand out for his. He took it, and
we walked together into my backyard. The river was swollen, and you could
hear it churning down there in the darkness somewhere. The air felt warm on the
skin of my forearms as I lay down on the ground beneath the big ash tree in our
backyard. He lay down next to me, and I showed him what the sky looked like
from my house, all split up by the branches that were just beginning to sprout
leaves.
He told me that he and Noah were moving, to Colorado, where Noah had
gotten into some boarding school for troubled kids. Davis would finish high
school out there, at a public school. They’d rented a house. “It’s smaller than our
current place,” he said. “But on the other hand, no tuatara.”
He asked me how I was doing, and I told him that I felt okay much of the
time. Four weeks between visits to Dr. Singh now.
“So when are you leaving?” I asked him.
“Tomorrow,” he said, and that killed the conversation for a while.
“Okay, so,” I said at last, “what am I looking at?”
He laughed a little. “Well, you’ve got Jupiter up there, of course. Very bright
tonight. And there’s Arcturus.” He squirmed a bit to turn around and pointed
toward another part of the sky. “And there’s the Big Dipper, and if you follow
the line of those two stars, right there, that’s Polaris, the North Star.”
“Why’d you tell the cops to look down there?” I asked.
“It was eating Noah up, not knowing. I realized . . . I guess I realized I had to
be a big brother, you know? That’s my full-time occupation now. That’s who I
am. And he needed to know why his father wasn’t in touch with him more than
he needed all the money, so that’s what we did.”
I reached down and squeezed his hand. “You’re a good brother.”
He nodded. I could see in the gray light that he was crying a little. “Thanks,”
he said. “I kind of just want to stay here in this particular instant for a really long
time.”
“Yeah,” I said.
We settled into a silence, and I felt the sky’s bigness above me, the
unimaginable vastness of it all—looking at Polaris and realizing the light I was
seeing was 425 years old, and then looking at Jupiter, less than a light-hour from
us. In the moonless darkness, we were just witnesses to light, and I felt a sliver
of what must have driven Davis to astronomy. There was a kind of relief in
having your own smallness laid bare before you, and I realized something Davis
must have already known: Spirals grow infinitely small the farther you follow
them inward, but they also grow infinitely large the farther you follow them out.
And I knew I would remember that feeling, underneath the split-up sky, back
before the machinery of fate ground us into one thing or another, back when we
could still be everything.
I thought, lying there, that I might love him for the rest of my life. We did
love each other—maybe we never said it, and maybe love was never something
we were in, but it was something I felt. I loved him, and I thought, maybe I will
never see him again, and I’ll be stuck missing him, and isn’t that so terrible.
—
But it turns out not to be terrible, because I know the secret that the me lying
beneath that sky could not imagine: I know that girl would go on, that she would
grow up, have children and love them, that despite loving them she would get
too sick to care for them, be hospitalized, get better, and then get sick again. I
know a shrink would say, Write it down, how you got here.
So you would, and in writing it down you realize, love is not a tragedy or a
failure, but a gift.
You remember your first love because they show you, prove to you, that you
can love and be loved, that nothing in this world is deserved except for love, that
love is both how you become a person, and why.
—
But underneath those skies, your hand—no, my hand—no, our hand—in his, you
don’t know yet. You don’t know that the spiral painting is in that box on your
dining room table, with a Post-it note stuck to the back of the frame: Stole this
from a lizard for you.—D. You can’t know yet how that painting will follow you
from one apartment to another and then eventually to a house, or how decades
later, you’ll be so proud that Daisy continues to be your best friend, that growing
into different lives only makes you more fiercely loyal to each other. You don’t
know that you’d go to college, find a job, make a life, see it unbuilt and rebuilt.
I, a singular proper noun, would go on, if always in a conditional tense.
But you don’t know any of that yet. We squeeze his hand. He squeezes back.
You stare up at the same sky together, and after a while he says, I have to go, and
you say, Good-bye, and he says, Good-bye, Aza, and no one ever says good-bye
unless they want to see you again.